# Introduction
*The Grimoire* is the magic sourcebook for the Shadowrun game system. The material in this book expands on the magic rules in the Shadowrun rulebook and introduces additional systems that add to the game's depth. As with all expansion rules, players and the gamemaster should examine the optional rules and agree on which, if any, to add to their game. Gamemasters should always feel free to change or adjust any Shadowrun rules to fit the type of game they intend to play.

Originally published in 1989 as a supplement to the first edition of the Shadowrun rules, released that year, *The Grimoire* has been revised to conform to the updated Shadowrun, Second Edition (SRII) rules. A substantial portion of the material presented in the original Grimoire now appears in Shadowrun, Second Edition. Information that still appears only in The Grimoire has been clarified, updated, and expanded. Any references in this book to the basic Shadowrun rules refer to those given in the second edition (hereafter abbreviated SRII).

*The Grimoire* presents substantial changes to several aspects of the basic Shadowrun magic system. The Enchanting and Spell Design rules have been updated and expanded. The same is true for the overview of nature and elemental spirits, which includes three new types: watchers, allies, and free spirits. *The Grimoire* also includes sections on magical Initiation, advanced Metamagic, Magic Groups, Astral Quests, and the Metaplanes. New magic-wielding opponents appear in the form of Toxic Spirits and Shamans and Insect Spirits and Shamans, and the book ends with an expanded Spell Directory and Table of Spells.

Enjoy! 

---

 The Making of Magicians

"We're not people. We're magicians. People aren't willing to pay the price to take the path we follow." 

The ways of magic, the paths magicians walk and cross, are many and varied. Being magically active is a state that nearly defies description. What is it like to see the world through magical eyes?  How do the streets, the wilderness, the people themselves look to one who is aware?  Choose a path, walk the way, and discover the answers for yourself.

What makes a magician? 

* Ask a mage: "**Study**. **Practice**. **Will**. Years of discipline to hone the inherent talent into power."
* Ask a shaman: "When the spirits speak, **listen** to hear the power within and **dance** to its music with the totem. It is a dance a shaman must practice all his life."
* Or ask a Wiccan, or a voudoun houngan, or a Shinto miko, or... well, ask ten magicians what makes them magicians, and they'll spout thirteen different answers.

This book is not about magical training or which techniques are valid and which are superstitious drek. That squawk's been going loud and long for centuries, and the Awakening has only made it harder to decide. These days it is possible for some kid from the Barrens to use native talent and a half-dozen spells from a pirate grimoire to splatter someone with a doctorate in thaumaturgy from Texas A&M&M. So whose training was worth more? 

But the late mage and the street-wiz who smoked him have this in common: both have made magic the most important thing in their lives, and they have devoted the major portion of their time and energy to that commitment. That's what makes a **real magician**. Anything else is just dabbling.

Shadowrun players with magician characters discover the truth of the commitment required for magic as they realize theirs are the only characters with major demands on their **Karma**. Everyone else saves it up, buys some skills, and tries to keep a few points on the karmic credstick to save their butts when a run turns ugly. Magicians are a different story, chummer. They burn Karma just to learn new spells, per p. 132 Shadowrun, Second Edition (SRII). By using a grimoire, specifically this book, they will spend still more to conjure more powerful spirits, cast more potent spells, and penetrate the deeper secrets of magic through initiation. Why do magicians take big-time hits on Karma? Because a real magician's life force and luck—his karma, in other words—determine what he does.

A player must keep several points in mind when developing a magician character for roleplaying.

* First, any magician worth his salt will probably not excel in any other field. Unless the character experiences an incredible run of luck, magicking will eat up his or her Karma and nuyen like candy. Magicians who start the slide down the magic slope toward burnout can only stay one step ahead of the loss through initiation (a new option for magicians). They may also simply end up with a headful of magical knowledge that they cannot really use.

* Second, magicians represent the smallest minority of the population. Only **1 percent** of the people in the world can use magic at all. A fraction of that percent practice minor magicks, or never get the proper training, or go crazy trying to deal with what they are. By some accounts, there are three to four million fully capable, trained, competent magicians in the Sixth World, though some studies suggest that the percentage is rising with each new generation. Though rarity makes a magician valuable, it also makes him feared. He or she is different, with a capital D. A corporation, for example, will put up with drek from a wage mage that would get a mundane suit fired or maybe even disappeared. Magicians are hard to come by, and the corp takes what it can get. On the down side, corporations tend to watch their magicians like hawks, playing them off one another, because the company just can't trust mavericks. Lots of folks will go their whole lives without ever seeing a magician close up, much less seeing one perform magic. What ideas they have about magic they get from the trid shows and simsense chips, where magicians are either sex-idol stars, comic relief, or sinister villains, all tossing off killer spells without raising a sweat. Ignorance makes people think magicians are super-powerful types who can fry an enemy in the wink of an eye.

* Third, the magician lives in a world that mundanes simply cannot understand. He senses things that they do not. He lives by rules that would get anyone else tranquilized to the eyeballs and slapped into a padded cell. Lonely place, the magician's world. It's no wonder that magicians tend to congregate in their own bars and form their own groups for business and for pleasure. When they can. If they can.

---

 Magic and Society

Since the Awakening, the highly technological society of the 2050s has had to learn to live with magic in its daily affairs. Medicine, the arts, law, and business, not to mention religion, are only some of the fields affected by the Great Change. Forty-plus years into the Change, magic powers alone will not get a magician onto the talk-show circuit, nor does a trial for felonious magical assault still make page-one headlines. This section examines how magic has affected life in the 2050s.

 The Magical Child

Magical ability usually manifests at or just before puberty, between the ages of ten and twelve years for most humans and metahumans, but as early as eight years for some of the Awakened races. Reported cases of younger children becoming magically active are rare. Some magically endowed children first display their powers spontaneously under stress. An angry child may, for example, unexpectedly hurl a low-power spell, or the "invisible friend" of another may suddenly become visible. Many young physical adepts have discovered their abilities in the rough-and-tumble of childhood games or junior athletics. A magical child's aura will show telltale signs of his or her power, but magic potential is difficult to sense before the power becomes active. Once it does become active, the child's aura will show clearly as that of a magician, though some experts claim the ability to assense the difference between trained, aware young magicians and those who are yet unaware of their potential power.

Children in the NAN tribes, in corporate communities, and in sophisticated cultures are watched closely for early signs of power. Those possessing it are treasured and trained in the uses of magic, usually as apprentices to tribal shamans or through schools and universities with major programs in occult science. The motives for providing this training vary widely. The tribes, as a rule, respect magical power and want to see it properly channeled. The corporations are chronically short of magicians, and look forward to seeing a good, loyal wage mage emerge at the end of the training. Magical children in other environments have less predictable fates. Some may grow to adulthood never knowing they are capable of magic. Others may be taught to believe that magic and other phenomena of the Awakening are evil, and will subconsciously block their talent. Such a psychic lock may make it impossible to train this magic potential later in life. Street kids, too, may never know that they have magical ability. Those who do somehow discover their gifts usually escape from the streets, most often when spotted by a corporate recruiter looking for talent. Others will seek training from a known street magician and use their powers for good or ill on their home turf.

In extreme cases, backward communities have destroyed magical children for displaying "unnatural powers ." Such lynchings have become rarer as the hysteria that followed immediately after the Awakening has died down.

 Magic and Religion

The initial reaction of most major religions to the Awakening was one of profound shock. Though some church leaders at first behaved as though the Apocalypse had come, most faiths eventually came to terms with the situation, dealing with the changes in a humane and sane fashion.

Christianity, in particular, had to struggle with the resurgence of magic on Earth. For centuries, Christian churches had taught that magic was a forbidden study, a vain deceit of the devil. In 2024, however, Pope John XXV, the Roman Catholic pontiff, issued an historic encyclical, *In Imago Dei* ("In the Image of God"), which set forth the following statements as official Church doctrine:

* That metahumans are possessed of souls and capable of salvation. Discrimination against metahumans is not Christian.
* That magical abilities are not, by nature, evil. Rather, like any other human ability, they may be used for good or evil ends.
* That spirits are living manifestations of nature. Thus, conjuring is not in itself evil.

Expanding somewhat on the last point, John XXV declared that conjuring touches so many questions of faith and doctrine that Catholics may not practice it without specific permission of the Church. Rome usually grants permission to conjure only to clergy, and only under unique circumstances.

Most Christian churches followed Rome's lead. Indeed, some sects, most notably Unitarianism, had already taken more liberal positions. Only the most rigidly fundamental sects still maintain their traditional abhorrence of magic, spirits, and the Awakened.

The three main sects of Judaism recognize that magical phenomena can come from the Lord. Orthodox Judaism restricts magical efforts to healing and defense against hostile magic and spirits. Certain esoteric, ultra-orthodox sects with a tradition of cabalistic study and wonder-working tzaddikim do not observe these restrictions. Conservative and Reform Judaism do not restrict their members' magical activities, though use of magic on the Sabbath is forbidden in all three sects. All persuasions, of course, consider it sinful to use magic for evil ends. Judaism upholds full equality for metahumans.

In the Islamic world, the return of magic recalled the great days of Moorish magic in Renaissance Spain and North Africa, when Arab magicians and alchemists dominated the art. Today, the magical arts are accepted and studied widely by the children of Islam. Though some prejudice exists against metahumans in Sunni-dominated areas, it is more social than religious. The more conservative Shiite sect of Islam maintains that the Koran forbids dabbling in magical powers, and the use of magic remains a capital crime in Shiite-controlled areas. Metahumans are barely tolerated. Orks and dwarfs are regarded as particularly accursed. Lynchings are common.

Hinduism, Buddhism, and Shintoism, the great religions of the East, take a neutral stand on the subject of magical workings. Indeed, some of the more mystical sects number powerful magicians among their followers. The lack of acceptance of metahumans in the Far East is more a social than a religious phenomenon ; higher-caste Hindus are particularly prejudiced against metahumans.

The last few years have seen new religions arise, some more magically oriented than others. In North America, the Church of the Whole Earth, Inc., began as a loose coalition of urban shamans, Wiccans, eco-activists, and others of like mind. The group embraces a liberal, pantheistic attitude, but tends toward worship of Gaia, the Mother Goddess. A typical service shows an interesting blend of traditional American Protestant practices and typically shamanic celebration.

Another new "religion" that has been growing quickly is the Universal Brotherhood, active in the Americas and many parts of Europe. This sect, numbering several hundred-thousand members in North America alone, teaches members mental systems of self-help, backing this up with financial aid, employment, education, charitable work, and other similar benefits. The Brotherhood's mass revivals are noted for their positive effect on both the faithful and visitors alike. Though the group has no overt magical connection, they encourage magically capable members to fulfill their potential.

 Magic and the Law

The very nature of magic made the creation of legislation to deal with it inevitable. So far, the United Canadian and American States (UCAS) and the Confederated American States (CAS) have passed laws concerning the results of magical acts. Bills to regulate the art itself have continually failed to pass or been struck down by the courts as illegal and unconstitutional, but the following major points are now firmly established in common law.

A felony committed using magic is always considered to be a premeditated act. Killing someone with magic is considered first-degree murder if brought to trial, unless it is possible to prove self-defense or other mitigating circumstances. Criminal acts committed by a spirit are the responsibility of the magician who summoned the being.

Because both the UCAS and CAS retain major elements of the former U.S. Bill of Rights in their legal systems, magical methods such as a mind probe spell cannot be used to produce evidence, as this violates the Fifth Amendment prohibition against self-incrimination. However, reading an aura to determine magical connections to a spell lock maintaining a criminal spell has achieved the same status as fingerprinting or DNA-patterning.

Many large jurisdictions employ a **forensic magician**, whose position is analogous to a coroner's or medical examiner's. When expert testimony on magical conditions and methods is presented as admissible evidence, it is always subject to scrutiny by a duly sworn forensic magician. This includes evidence obtainable only in astral space. Spectral evidence, that is, evidence given by spirits, is not admissible in a court of law.

In civil law, an ongoing debate rages over spell copyright. Under present statutes, the designer of a spell may copyright the spell formula and charge fees for its sale or be paid royalties for sales by others. In practice, this law is used to prosecute those who pirate formulas and distribute them in quantity. Though reverse-engineering a spell from technical data is also deemed a violation of copyright, it is almost impossible to prove because a spell itself is judged an expression of natural law, and thus not subject to patent or copyright. The anti-piracy tool used by most spell developers, especially in the corporate sector, is secrecy. Spell data is simply not published. There is a thriving industrial espionage business dealing in magical secrets.

The term "corporate law" has taken on a double meaning in 2050. Besides business law, it also refers to the laws that various corporations enforce within their jurisdictions. Ever since the extraterritoriality decisions of the early 21st century, corporations can opt to prosecute criminals under their own legal codes. Depending on the corporation and its legal code, a misdemeanor or simple tort in civil law may be a felony, or even a capital crime. As for magical crimes, acts committed by corporate magicians are generally not subject to legal investigation, while magic used by other magicians to the detriment of the corporation receives dire punishment. This assumes, of course, that the corporate security agents have not summarily sent an offending magician to a "higher" court.

 Magic and Business

Magic has direct application only at two extreme ends of the business spectrum. Magic is a mainstay of such relatively trivial industries as fashion and entertainment. These may represent large and rich markets, but the presence of magicians in a Rubinstein salon or working on special effects at Industrial Light & Magic™ is not likely to transform global economics. At the other end of the spectrum, the use of magic Is part of the most delicate and expensive prototype experimentation carried out by high-technology research and development. This is most notable in biological research, but magical techniques also have applications in the physical sciences. The rituals involved require a delicate melding of magic and esoteric scientific theory that only a handful of theoretical occultists can comprehend. It should come as no surprise that these double-domes are prime candidates for extraction runs, and quite frankly, a company can replace its CEO more easily than one of these talented fellows.

Magic's greatest impact in the business sphere has been in the area of **corporate security**. Just as the advent of Matrix technology began an escalating "arms race" between deckers and corp-data security specialists, the corporations had to procure the services of magicians before the "nut-case eco-freaks and anti-establishment NAN sympathizers" got organized enough to hurt them. The fortunes of corporations and executives who used magic to claw their way to the top also pointed out the advantages of occult muscle to the powers-that-be. Aztechnology is a prime example of how far magical power and ruthless business practices can carry a corporation.

---

 Who's Who of Magic

The following prominent scholars and magicians have each in some way advanced the Awakened world's understanding of magic and the powers and capabilities of those who wield it. Some, like Daniel Howling Coyote, changed the face of the world. Others made It possible for the magically talented to not only survive, but flourish in a changed society.

**Mullins Chadwick**
Born April 23, 2008, sociologist Mullins Chadwick is a leading authority on the Awakening and its effect on modern culture. He received his B.A. in literature at the University of California, Berkeley, in 2029, and a Ph.D in anthropology from the University of Ohio in 2031. In 2045, he became a full professor at Harvard University. Chadwick openly and often criticizes those who discriminate against metahuman races. Drawing on his knowledge of folklore, comparative religion, and cultural anthropology, Chadwick speaks out strongly for the unity of humankind and denounces any who stand in the way of this goal. Among other awards, Mullins Chadwick won the Campbell Fellowship to the Mythological Institute in 2039 and the Pulitzer Prize in 2041 for his book, *Monkeytribe: Survival Manual for Erect Bipeds* (Putnam-Izumo, New York, 2041). His latest publication, *Wake Up Call: Living in the Awakened World* (Putnam-Izumo, New York, 2047), has received critical praise.

**Arthur Garrett**
Born October 18, 1996, Arthur Garrett studied at Harvard and Oxford Universities, eventually receiving his Th.D. from UCLA in 2036. Currently serving as Chairman of the Department of Occult Studies at UCLA, Garrett is widely considered the most influential academician in the field of magical studies. In the years since he took over the department in 2042, funding for occult studies has skyrocketed.

**Randall Grant**
Randall Grant was born in 1992 and earned his Th.D. from MITM in 2036. One of the first theoretical thaumaturges, those talented people possessing vast knowledge of magical lore and theory but no magical ability, Grant argued against the "materialist" theory that magic can be explained by hysteria, psionic powers, or other elements of the natural sciences. Basing much of his theory on the work of Kano and White Eagle (See Akiko Kano, Arthur White Eagle), Grant concluded that the source of magic lay somewhere beyond the pre-Awakening model of the universe. This hypothesis made Grant a leading proponent of the so-called "what it is" school of thought. Grant died March 19, 2050, apparently as a result of a freak accident. Authorities now believe, however, that an Alamos 20,000 member assassinated Grant to keep him from revealing a connection between the terrorist organization and Dr. Armand Duplessis, a leading member of the materialists.

**Daniel Howling Coyote**
Born Daniel Coleman in 1991 and raised on a Nevada reservation, Daniel Howling Coyote became an early follower of the Sovereign American Indian Movement (SAIM). Little else is known about the early life of the man who came to be known as the Prophet of the Great Ghost Dance. In 2011, having taken the name Howling Coyote, Daniel claimed to have seen a vision in which the Great Spirit gave him the true power of the Ghost Dance. Blessed with the magic of the Ghost Dance, Howling Coyote led hundreds of imprisoned Native Americans out of the maximum-security Re-Education Center near Abilene, Texas, on Christmas Eve, 2011. Howling Coyote led his people to freedom, and as word of his power spread, uprisings took place in re-education centers all across North America. Howling Coyote dropped out of public view until 2014, when he announced the formation of the Native American Nations. Upon formal recognition of NAN and ratification of the Treaty of Denver in 2018, Coyote's people elected him president of the Sovereign Tribal Council, NAN's governing body. He held this position until the Tsimshian seceded in 2037. Disillusioned by the schism and the squabbling among the tribes, Howling Coyote retired from public life. His current whereabouts remain a mystery.

**Akiko Kano**
Born in 2001, Akiko Kano studied at the Imperial University of Tokyo and received her Ph.D. in Metaphysics from California Technical Institute in 2028. Along with Arthur White Eagle, Kano co-directed the UCLA Study of Magical Phenomena (2031-35). The UCLA project represented the first rigorous attempt to catalog magical powers and thereby develop a model for magical theory. The Kano-White Eagle Theory of Metaphysical Phenomena netted Akiko Kano and Arthur White Eagle a Nobel Prize in 2036. Her illustrious career has earned Kano a well-deserved reputation as a highly respected shaman.

**Arnold Ledbetter**
Well-known broadcaster Arnold Ledbetter was born in 1992. He made his mark with his famous trideo fund-raising drives, in which he sells allegedly magical items, and pronounces blessings over the airwaves. A wide network of trideo stations currently carries Ledbetter's program, "Hour of the Magi ." Each program preaches an anti-science, anti-technology message along with a strong pro-metahuman slant. Frequent topics include shamanic teachings, pre-Awakening magical texts, and the existence of the lost continent of Atlantis.

**Harold Jonathan Mason**
Harold Jonathan Mason, born in 2002, helped found the Metahuman Order of Occultists, Sorcerers, and Enchanters (MOOSE), a group dedicated to advancing medical care within the metahuman community. Mason enrolled at UCLA in 2020, goblinized to an ork in 2021, and left school shortly thereafter. An outspoken champion of metahuman rights, Mason was implicated in several magical attacks against Humanis Policlub leaders. No one involved in any of the incidents brought charges against him. Mason died in 2050 at the age of 48.

**Arthur White Eagle**
Born in 1998, Arthur White Eagle studied at UCLA, earning his Th.D. in 2034. Along with Akiko Kano, White Eagle co-directed the UCLA Study of Magical Phenomena (2031-35), the first rigorous attempt to catalog magical powers and thereby develop a theoretical model for magic. Both White Eagle and Kano received a Nobel Prize in 2036 for their work, the Kano-White Eagle Theory of Metaphysical Phenomena. A practicing mage, White Eagle may have participated in the Great Ghost Dance in 2017.

**Ignaz Yablonski**
Ignaz Yablonski was born January 7, 1991, in Warsaw, Poland. Later that year, his family emigrated to the United States of America. Yablonski studied medicine and joined Seattle's Public Health Department in 2021 as a pathologist. With several of his colleagues, Yablonski proved that an infectious agent did not cause goblinization. In 2032, he became Seattle's Chief Medical Examiner. Upon completing his doctoral studies at Pacific University in 2041, Yablonski accepted Seattle's newly created post of Director of Forensic Magic. The forensic magic department takes charge of all criminal investigations involving magic. Yablonski is known as a scrupulously honest and tough-minded investigator. Though he possesses limited magical abilities, his knowledge of magical theory is unmatched.

---

 Publications and Data Networks

The following information services disseminate public and private knowledge about current events in the magic-users' world. Each appeals to a different audience, but crossover readership does exist. Many smaller publications also enjoy widespread acceptance, and each nation and continent supports a number of magic-related publications that share the viewpoint of those presented here, and some that oppose it. These four are the most popular magic-related services on the North American continent.

**Manual of Practical Thaumaturgy**
*Ambrosius Publications, Manhattan, New York, UCAS*
This is the principal technical journal used by the magically active. Ambrosius Publications has revised the Manual every year since 2036 and offers supplemental updates throughout the year. The Manual contains technical information on hundreds of spells.

**Proceedings of the AAAT**
*AAAT Press, Washington, Federal District of Columbia*
The American Association for the Advancement of Thaumaturgy sets all standards for legitimate magical practice in the UCAS. (A similar body, the Confederacy Commission for Magical Practices, serves the CAS) . Under the label "legitimate magical practice," AAAT administers everything from academic accreditation to the licensing of specific procedures (though not all provinces require this). Members present numerous scholarly papers at various AAAT conferences on such technical subjects as magical theory, spell design, and spirit control. The principal professional society for magicians in North America, AAAT membership includes many magicians who earn their principal living through shadowrunning and are registered with the association under aliases.

**Business Thaumaturgy Datanet**
*Atlanta, Georgia, CAS*
This major datanet devotes every megapulse of space to technical and popular articles dealing with magic and business. Boasting 127,000 registered subscribers, BTD is the most widely distributed service of its kind. Its regional centers handle distribution in Seattle, California, the UCAS, and its CAS home offices, as well as feeding the more tech-oriented NAN states of Aztlan and Tír Tairngire. In addition to posting items of general interest, the BTD is widely acknowledged as the clearing-house for recruiting announcements by corps and other organizations looking for magical muscle.

**Magicknet**
No official origin story exists, but rumor has it that a group of computer hackers with an interest in magic founded this unofficial datanet in the 1980s and continue to maintain the service as an underground network for magicians. Magicknet stays current with the latest changes in both magical and computer techniques, and is a primary source of pirated spell information, formulas, and other nonpublic information on the subject of magic. A cadre of top deckers supposedly maintains the datanet in return for magical assistance by its many users. As its activities are completely unofficial, it has no main office or regularly accessible LTG. Nodes pop up in an area, thrive for a bit, then vanish when the local law or corps take an interest.

---

 Way of the Mage

Pundits often refer to the hermetic tradition of magic as "magic as science ." This description is both true and false. True because mages apply scientific standards to their magic, and false because hermetic magic is much more than just a discipline of science. It is important for a player running a mage character to know what the hermetic tradition means to the character's way of looking at the world.

First, and most important, magic is not just something a mage does. It is what he is. A mage thinks, acts, and breathes magic constantly, every moment of every day. Some sociologists compare the hermetic mage to the decker who lives in a virtual world of data and software, and the comparison is not far off. To a mage, the world is magic and magic is the central force of the world. Magic gives the mage purpose and fulfillment. A mage may do magic for many reasons, but ultimately he does it for the sake of the magic itself.

Does this mean that mages never do anything else? Not at all. However, they do view everything they see from a magical slant. A wage mage might see an intricate magical complexity in his corporation's financial dealings, a mage studying a martial art might see in it new methods of magical attack and defense, and a mage who is politically inclined might ponder the magical power of a rousing speech upon a crowd. Once an individual has stepped onto the path of magic, it is impossible to see the world from the mundane point of view ever again.

How does a person become a mage? Most mages would reply that some amount of magical talent exists within us all, and it is only a matter of finding the will to study and practice hard enough to develop that talent and focus it into magical skill. The reason more people don't become mages is that few have the dedication or the drive, the inner fire, needed for the long and difficult course of study and practice, study and practice, day in and day out. Power does not come overnight and a true mage devotes his whole life to learning and growing in skill and knowledge.

Shamans often say that mages talk when a shaman would act. To a mage, however, talking is acting. Mages love the opportunity to debate and discuss all manner of ideas and theories with their colleagues in endless "shop talk" sessions that would bore a shaman to tears. They like nothing more than trying to prove a pet theory or discussing the structure of the metaplanes in relation to each other. In fact, most of the debate over the nature of shamanic totems and their effects on the structure of magic has been conducted entirely among mages, while the shamans simply accept at face value the power their totems provide and get on with working magic.

The way of the mage may seem like a lot of drudgery, poring over libraries of text, practicing countless rituals, and memorizing endless theories and formulae. To a mage, however, this is what gives life its zest. Magic is about knowledge. Knowledge of magic, knowledge of self, and ultimately, knowledge of the universe. Magic is not simply work, but the Great Work, a way of looking into the universe and unlocking its deepest secrets.

The universe of the mage stretches further than the world of a mundane. A mage's universe includes **astral space** and the **elemental metaplanes**, aspects of the world that mundanes cannot even see. Initiation is the only way for mages to reach the metaplanes, and because the metaplanes are closer to the true heart of reality, mages spend much effort exploring them, trying to better understand and explain them. As a mage advances in levels of initiation, so too does he advance in knowledge of the inner mysteries. A hermetic magician applies to magic the care and certainty of scientific methodology combined with a sense of wonder at the grace and grandeur of reality and its manifold mysteries.

As much as mages like to talk, they are also skilled in silence. A mage needs to know how to observe and how to listen. Magical discussion and debate have their place, but mages gladly set it aside when it is time to work the magic and perform the ritual. The mage sets aside his role as objective observer, the questions and the nitpicking, and becomes as deeply involved in the effort as an artist who focuses on a single face in order to paint it. There is nothing but the mage and the magic. For that moment, the importance of any technique fades, and doing the magic and connecting deeply to the universe are all that matter. A mage performing magic is much like a conductor standing before an orchestra, harmonizing all the instruments together into a symphony of power, directing the musicians toward the single purpose laid out by the careful and complex formula of the score. Like all great artists, great mages bring something of themselves to their work, adding a bit of flair or a touch of style that separates their work from all the rest and makes it uniquely theirs. A mage directs and harmonizes his magic with a single will toward a specific end. The mage is the artist, and the components, spells, spirits, and rituals are the instruments of his art.

While a shaman sees astral space as an organic ecosystem, a mage views astral space in the abstract, as an underlying reality, the basic structure on which the universe is built and which guides the formation and balance of all things in perfect harmony. A shaman might call this view "mechanistic;" -astral space as a great machine of gears and cogs-but the mage sees astral space as the fascinating equivalent of a perfect crystal or a Mozart symphony, an incredible structure of tremendous beauty and perfect mathematical precision, where each individual part is blended into a harmonious whole. This kind of perfect structure and order underlies all things for a mage. Everything is made up of complex systems working in harmony to produce patterns. Mages believe that even apparently chaotic and random events fit into the structure of a larger pattern.

The mage himself also fits into the pattern of the universe in some way, be it as part of a corporate structure or as a shadowrunner forming a vital part of the complex modern sprawl. A mage finds a true purpose in life and follows it with a fierce devotion that amazes most mundanes. Mages do not share a common view of morality with their fellow magicians, or agree on how one should fit into the order of things, but they do share a common view of the nature of the world.

To play a hermetic magician character, simply remember that magic is the central aspect of the mage's life. A mage uses constant study and practice as a means of gaining knowledge of the inner nature of the universe, and in so doing gains knowledge of the self as well. Every part of a mage's life is touched by his world view and quest for knowledge until it becomes all but impossible for the mage to look at the world in any other way. Players who keep these basic tenets of the mage's life in mind will be able to successfully roleplay their mages with the proper understanding of the character's world view and his or her place in it.

---

 Way of the Shaman

The making of a shaman is far more complex and subtle than might first appear. A shaman's ability to use magic sets him apart from the rest of humanity, but that is just the beginning. The way of the shamanic tradition lies in a very different direction from the hermetic path.

Understanding the shaman's totem and his relationship to it is the most important aspect of the shamanic reality. The shaman's power comes to him from the totem, but more than the mere presence or intercession of a totem gives him this power. According to tradition, every person has a totem spirit looking out for him or her. Whether or not this belief is true does not affect the game ; in the roleplaying world all characters enjoy the advantages of luck and health. (Ever wonder why player characters never come down with colds, and live through shadowruns that should kill them?) The shamanic tradition might credit those same advantages to the protection of a strong spirit.

So, if the shaman's power comes through the totem and everybody has one, why can't we all use shamanic magic?  The difference between the shaman and everybody else is that the shaman is **aware** of the totem's presence and assistance. In fact, the shaman actually knows it exists. He has invested much time and effort in discovering who his totem is and making contact with it. Though on rare occasions the totem initiates the contact, the potential shaman must still put forth effort to achieve his full power. A player running a character with the ability to work shamanic magic represents this initial investment of energy by assigning Priority A to the Magic category during character creation. Being a shaman, being one with the totem, is the most important thing in his or her life. Once he becomes aware of the totem, he must next learn how to communicate and work with it.

The relationship of the shaman and the totem is not one of master/servant for either the shaman or the totem. The two entities work together, following independent, yet interwoven paths; they are like close friends who think alike. The shaman's personality is much like that of his totem. (Or perhaps the totem's personality is like that of the shaman .) The shaman thinks much like his totem. He may try to act in opposition to his totem or pretend to be something else entirely, but the totem's nature is his or her true nature. To deny the totem is to deny oneself. When a shaman loses his power it is more likely because of this inner conflict than because the neglected spirit is refusing to cooperate. When the shaman accepts the totem and is true to their shared nature, all is well. The totem acts as a guide and mentor to the fledgling shaman, showing him the wonders and dangers of the world of magic. As he grows in knowledge and power he becomes more independent, but the ties to the totem remain forever. A shaman is never alone. He may always call upon the companionship of his totem, and the totem will always have the companionship of the shaman. The connection is eternal, perhaps transcending death itself. It cannot be tossed aside or ignored. The totem has chosen, has chosen well, and is never wrong.

The exact nature of totems is the subject of extensive debate. Are they free spirits that have taken an interest in humanity (or at least certain humans)? Alien, but seemingly sympathetic?  Are they merely subconscious constructs of the shaman's mind? The will made reality?  Are they formed from the collective mind of humanity, humanity's darkest dreams and brightest hopes manifest as energy to be called upon? 

These questions are unanswerable, and ultimately, (to the shaman) unimportant. Totems behave in the same way as free spirits, and that is how all shamans regard them. To a shaman, totems have clearly identifiable, distinct personalities (as do free spirits), may choose to manifest or not, and generally behave in a very "human," though slightly alien, way. Free spirits quantifiably exist; therefore totems must also exist if viewed as similar beings. If a shaman began to seriously doubt the reality of his totem he would lose the ability to work magic. Doubting the existence of the totem calls into doubt the very fabric of the shaman's reality. For example, if a person began to wonder whether his or her view of the world was real or a manifestation of schizophrenia, would that person be able to find the will, the courage to interact with a world that might not be?  This failure of courage is what happens to the shaman who doubts the truth of his totem.

Running philosophical and metaphysical arguments about where and when the connection to the totem begins are a constant source of discussion outside the shamanic circle. For those who view shamanism as a reflection of personality, the shaman-to-be comes before the totem, and chooses the totem based on aspects of his or her personality. A person with a cat-like personality is chosen by Cat. Those who view totems as independent forces, reflections of nature rather than man, see the connection between totem and shaman as much deeper. A shaman-to-be begins walking the totem's path with his first breath and first tentative steps. From birth, the road unwinds before him, the totem always waiting just ahead for the right moment to reveal itself. One who is like Cat will be chosen by Cat, but that choice is preordained.

In addition to the presence of a totem, the shaman differs from the hermetic mage in his view of the world. Specifically, a shaman sees the other planes quite differently than a mage. The reality of astral space, and the mage's access to it, means more than just the ability to throw more powerful spells. To the mage, the astral plane is another world where power, information, and perhaps even companionship can be found. The hermetic tradition's view of astral space is abstract ; spell formulae are like blueprints for an astral machine, and detail and knowledge is accessed like information from a computer file. In contrast, the shaman sees the astral world as a teeming ecosystem full of the richest variety of life ; all forms of life manifest upon the mundane plane and more are present in spirit in the reality of astral space. The shamanic tradition views astral space as the seed from which the mundane world first sprung, the cradle of all life. (After all, must not the spirit have come before the flesh?) This belief gives the shaman great respect for the astral plane, where power, knowledge, and allies can be found, but the risks are very real. The shaman accepts that anything that affects the astral world will also affect the material world.

The shaman's actions on the astral plane also affect his view of the material world. Within astral space the shaman meets with the living, intelligent spirits of all things. Every organic thing has a spirit ; animals, plants, stones, and so on. When the shaman learns to reach the metaplanes he can meet, talk with, and learn from these spirits.


While most mundanes, and even hermetic mages, see animals and the environment as tools to be used and discarded, the shaman sees their spirits as potential allies. The spirits cannot be commanded; they must be convinced, perhaps even cajoled or conned, into giving their assistance. Who is the shaman to order beings older and purer than he? An attempt to command a spirit would only give insult. The shaman accepts the environment as a resource, however. As Wolf hunts Deer, or as Deer consumes Grass, so the shaman takes what he needs from her environment—sometimes unkindly, as is sometimes true of nature itself. The difference between a shaman's use of the environment and a mundane's is that the shaman recognizes the living spirit of all things. The initiation process that gives the shaman access to the metaplanes strengthens this belief by repeatedly connecting the shaman to the absolute truth and perfection of those living spirits. Because the metaplanes are home to the shaman's totem and other powerful spirits, initiation is even more important to the shaman than the mage because each initiation level allows him or her to roam the astral planes more freely. The ability to reach these outer planes brings the shaman closer to his totem, and contact with the beings in the metaplanes strengthens his view of each part of the world as living, helping him gain insight into himself and the world at large.

Like the mage, the shaman has one overriding principle by which he or she lives. A shaman character must consistently view the world as full of intelligent life and must constantly be aware of his or her relationship with the totem. The shaman's personality will always share some similarity with the character of the totem, even if only on the deepest, most private level. Players who create their shaman characters with these concepts in mind will better understand their character and enhance their own roleplaying.

"Some folks can do more than I can, but no one is better than I am at what I do." 

---

 Enchanting

Magic takes many forms. There are the hermetic and shamanic traditions and the ways of sorcery and conjuring. There are full-blooded magicians and adepts who follow more specialized callings. But other arts must be described: enchanting, by which materials are made magical and things not thought possible become real, and the unique ways of the druids of Great Britain. The higher mysteries also unfold, giving adepts and their kind access to increased possibilities. Read on, and learn.

Enchanting governs the manufacture of magical ritual materials and fetishes (talismongering), refining special magical materials (alchemy), and making magical foci (artificing). Anyone, even a mundane, can use Talismongering Skill, but only a full magician or an enchanter i.e., a magical (enchanting) adept, can perform alchemy and artificing. Enchanting is also useful for analyzing foci (multiple focuses) and for reducing the cost of bonding them.

Talismongering, alchemy, and artificing are the three areas of Concentration possible for enchanting. Enchanting is a general magical skill similar to sorcery and conjuring, and fits into that branch of the Skill Web.

The following terms and concepts appear throughout this section.

* **Talismongering** is the manufacture of fetishes for a specific spell purpose (combat, health, and so on). It includes raw-material collection and analysis of magical items and materials.
* **Alchemy** centers on the arcanum of herbs, the arcanum of minerals, and the arcanum of metals.
* **Artificing** creates a specific type of focus and reduces bonding cost.

 Enchanting Miscellanea

The following is a brief overview of the specific aspects of enchanting that makes the process a unique part of magic.

 Enchanting and Drain

Unlike other forms of magic, enchanting causes no Drain. The magician brings the magical energy into manifestation very gradually, and "grounds" it safely into the item being enchanted. The wear and tear on the magician is thus reduced below the danger point. Enchanting takes a good deal of Karma, however, as well as time and money. These requirements keep the flow of magical materials and items well below demand in the marketplace. There are no assembly lines of burned-out mages grinding out magical goodies—magic is an art, not a technology.

 Druidic Enchanting

Enchanting rules vary slightly for druids (see Druids, pp. 28-32). Consult the rules on those pages for more information.

 Enchanting Gear

Enchanting requires special equipment classified as "working gear" (p. 244, SRII). Enchanting gear comes in only two forms: kit or shop. There is no "facility" equivalent in enchanting, as all tasks are on a "craftsman" level and do not use factory-type resources. Of course, a magician interested in enchanting a specific object might need a facility of the appropriate type to build that object from scratch.

An **enchanting kit** is needed for talismongering and to gather raw materials for enchanting. It can also be used to refine herbal or mineral materials. It costs 10,000¥, and the gear will fit inside a large backpack or suitcase. Think of it as a good, portable chemistry kit with some, er, unusual extra supplies.

An **enchanting shop** is needed for artificing or alchemy, for analyzing materials or items, and for refining metal ores. It costs 100,000¥. The equipment will fit into a mid-sized van, but using it requires room to spread out (about 50 square meters). This is especially true if working with metals or performing alchemy, which requires running furnaces and forges—not recommended activity for the interior of a van!  A shop used for working with these materials needs fuel for the furnace, forge, and so on: electrical current, natural gas, fuel oil, or a plentiful supply of wood or coal. A shop can, of course, do anything a kit can do (except fit inside a backpack).

Gear is sufficient for gathering raw materials or doing some talismongering. If the character plans to work in alchemy or artificing, he or she must meet additional requirements: a shaman must carry out these operations in a medicine lodge, and a mage must have access to a hermetic library to use Enchanting Skill.

 Talismongering

Talismongering is concerned with those elements of enchanting that do not produce anything inherently magical. Rather, it involves locating raw materials and preparing fetishes and ritual materials. A character need not be magically active in order to engage in talismongering. Many respected talismongers are mundanes whose goods prove plenty effective. Talismongering requires knowledge of plant lore, a little mineralogy, and the centuries-old formulas used to make charms, powders, incense, lucky pieces, and similar junk. That is, it seemed like junk until the Awakening. Talismongering can take some of the strain off the credstick if a character has been burning up fetishes faster than usual. Indeed, a magician may often find it essential to gather his own raw materials when making a focus absolutely from scratch—which is very powerful magic.

 Materials for Enchanting

The three general classes of material used in enchanting are herbal, mineral, and metal.

* **Herbal materials** are plants, roots, flowers, bark, wood, even molds and fungus.
* **Mineral materials** are crystals, precious and semiprecious stones, and rocks in general.
* **Metal materials** are separate from minerals and include ores of iron, gold, copper, tin, aluminum, and the other pure metals.

 Gathering Materials

Whether on a walk in the woods or an expedition into the howling wilderness, a character can use Enchanting Skill to gather raw materials for making fetishes and foci. A quest for raw materials makes for some good adventure ideas, too. The formula for certain magical items can turn out to require rare goodies found only in some out-of-the-way corner of the Earth. No matter where obtained, however, magicians receive special benefits when making foci from untouched raw materials. Often, the only way a magician can be sure that materials are virgin is to gather them personally. The magician may have to travel to a remote location to find the right resources. This is a gamemaster decision, though he can work out the details in cooperation with the player.

Because of the resource rush (or resource rape, as some call it) that peaked in the early 21st century, it can take a real trek to find a source of ores or minerals that's not so polluted that all the magic is either gone or poisonously twisted. Ironically, the demand for crystals and similar "New Age" goods in the eighties and nineties contributed to the poisoning of sources for magically useful materials. Entrepreneurs would sneak into a park or other natural preserve at night, dynamite a hillside, scoop up the shattered quartz deposits, and sell the bones of Mother Earth as "power stones" to the hip disciples of the New Age. Of course, not a scrap of magical energy was left in the minerals after such operations. Most of the decent spots for gathering materials are in the NAN territory, and the citizens of NAN are not fond of outsiders, be they magicians or corporate strip miners, sneaking in to tear the life from Mother Earth. This makes tribal connections a real bonus for any would-be enchanter.

**The Gathering Test**
Gathering one "unit" of raw materials takes a base time of 10 days. Make an Enchanting Test with a Target Number 4. To determine the actual time spent on the task, divide the base time by the number of successes rolled. If the character rolls no successes, he or she spends 10 days finding nothing. "Sheesh! Ten days to pick some fragging flowers?" he asks. Nope. Ten days (or a fraction thereof) to find a sufficient amount of material of the right type, stage of growth, and quality to use in magic. This involves more than merely scooping up armfuls of shrubbery. The magician must examine every leaf before he decides whether it is suitable for magical use.

If the character has a Special Skill or Concentration related to the material he is gathering, he makes another test using that skill, and adds the successes to those scored for the Enchanting Test. For example, if he is seeking metal ores and has the skill of Metallurgy, Geology, Mining, or a similar science, the player makes an Enchanting Test and a Success Test using that skill, each with a Target Number 4. He combines the successes from both tests to reduce the time it takes to gather one unit of raw material. A shaman searching for materials in a domain suitable to his totem (even if his version of the totem "lives" in another domain) adds Totem Advantage dice to the test. Thus, a Raccoon shaman gets this advantage unless he or she is in the mountains. Coyote gets the bonus anywhere on land, and so on.

Clever magicians may wonder if they can enlist the aid of spirits to gather raw materials. Indeed, they can. An elemental of the appropriate type (almost always earth) or a nature spirit can assist in finding materials. Add a number of dice equal to the spirit's Force Rating to the dice used in the Success Test. A unit of metal or mineral ore weighs about 10 kilograms. A unit of plant material weighs about 5 kilograms. The character must carry out certain ritual procedures when gathering raw materials, and these require an enchanting kit. The gamemaster may also require such useful items as picks, shovels, and pails. The use of heavy mining gear, powered tools, and anything that pollutes the environment (including explosives) will destroy the magical energy of the materials gathered. Commercially mined or produced materials can be used to make a focus, but the enchanted object does not get the bonus for the use of virgin materials. See Gathering Materials, above.

 Refining Materials

It requires only an enchanting kit to refine herbal materials. Refining metals takes an enchanting shop. Minerals meant for fetishes can be refined with a kit. Minerals to be used for foci require a shop. The base time for refining materials is 10 days, and the maximum number of units of raw material a character can process is equal to his Intelligence. To determine how long the refining process really took, the character makes an Enchanting Test against a Target Number 4, then divides the base time by the number of successes rolled. As with gathering materials, a relevant mundane skill can speed things up. If the character rolls no successes, something has gummed up the works and he or she came up with the same set of raw materials. Try again. If the Rule of One rears its ugly head, the raw materials have been spoiled and are of no magical value.

Success means that the raw materials are now refined. One unit of refined material is produced for each unit of raw material used in the process. A unit of refined material weighs half as much as the original raw material: 2.5 kilograms for herbal material and 5 kilograms for metals or minerals. Refined materials are used to make fetishes and virgin foci or serve as raw material for alchemy.

 Making Fetishes

Having obtained refined materials, the character can enchant those materials to make fetishes. One unit of refined materials can make a number of expendable fetishes equal to the character's Intelligence, or one reusable fetish. To see how long it takes, the player makes an Enchanting Test against a Target Number 4, then divides the number of successes into 24 hours. What? No successes? Well, chummer, the magician just blew 24 hours. Try again. A roll of all ones leaves him with ruined materials - trashed, useless, kaput. That's it. Making a fetish is very simple compared to the other uses of refined materials.

 Making Ritual Materials

Refined materials are suitable for making the special ritual materials needed in ritual sorcery, conjuring, building medicine lodges, and so on. Almost always herbal or mineral compounds, these can be made with an enchanting kit. Use the same ratings and tests for making ritual materials as for making fetishes, as described above.

 Analyzing Magical Items

A character with Enchanting Skill can analyze any magical material or item. He need not be magically active to do this, but being able to assense the item does help. No matter what the subject of the analysis, analyzing magical items requires an enchanting shop. The base time to analyze an item is 24 hours. Make an Enchanting Test using the appropriate target number from the Magical Analysis Table below. If the character can assense the material, reduce the target number by 1. Because the target number corresponds directly to the basic nature of the item under study, the gamemaster may want to keep the target number secret. Divide the number of successes into 24 hours to see how long the analysis will take. As usual, if the character scores no successes, he is not able to determine the nature of the material or item at the end of 24 hours, but can try again. On a roll of all ones, the character has succeeded only in destroying the item he or she was studying. (The gamemaster may use his discretion in determining the effect of the Rule of One, as the item's destruction may not always be appropriate) .

Successful analysis tells the character what the material is and its rating (if it has one). Successful analysis can also distinguish between refined materials gathered with the correct procedures and mundane material with no magical qualities. Of course, magicians can usually get this information simply by assensing the material (see Objects In Astral Space, p. 88). The more cumbersome analysis technique described above is generally used by mundanes or adepts who cannot assense.

**Magical Analysis Table**

| Item | Target Number |
|---|---|
| Not Magical | 3 |
| Refined Raw Material | 3 |
| Ritual Material or Fetish | 4 |
| Alchemical Radical | 5 |
| Focus Rating | 5 |

 Alchemy

A character can use Enchanting Skill to further process refined materials to make alchemical materials called radicals. When making a focus, the use of alchemical radicals makes it easier for the character to enchant the focus and may help reduce the Karma cost. According to rumor, at least six or seven corps are carrying out feverish research to reproduce the legendary products of alchemy, but none has announced any success so far. Alchemical materials have proven useful only in the work of enchanting. The old tales about magical potions, transmutation, and other such processes may turn out to be nothing more than that.

 Arcana

Alchemy deals with enchanting raw materials to make radicals. As mentioned earlier, the three classes of enchanting materials are herbals, minerals, and metals. In alchemy each class is an arcanum (plural arcana). Any magician may attempt to create a radical in any arcanum, regardless of the arcanum in which that magician specializes. His or her specialization only becomes important when using radicals to enchant a focus.

 Making Radicals

Alchemy requires an enchanting shop. The process of trying to produce radicals from mundane materials takes 28 days (one lunar month), and this time may not be reduced. The target number for the Success Test is equal to the number of units of refined materials being processed. Remember that in Shadowrun a target number may never be less than 2, even if processing involves only a single unit of material. The alchemist must spend the entire 28 days baby-sitting the alchemical process, or circulation, as it is called. If he is away from the shop for an extended period, he must make an Enchanting Test with a target number equal to the number of hours he left the circulation unattended. If he generates no successes, the process aborts and the character must start over. He or she can have another alchemist take care of business temporarily, but the second alchemist's Enchanting Skill must be at least as high as the first's. The process is very demanding and leaves no time for study, other magical work, and so on.

At the end of 28 days, the alchemist makes a Success Test. If he achieves any successes, he has produced a number of units of radicals equal to the original number of units he started with multiplied by the number of his successes. A unit of radical material weighs one-hundredth as much as the raw material: 50 grams for herbals and 100 grams for metals or minerals.

 Orichalcum

According to legend, it was the priest-kings of ancient Atlantis who first discovered orichalcum. Whether or not that is true, this orange-gold alloy is utterly absurd from any chemical or metallurgical point of view, and only alchemy can create it. This requires a special circulation, carried out as follows. Combine one unit each of the radicals of copper, gold, silver, and mercury, the "raw materials" needed for the alchemical circulation. The circulation proceeds normally until the final Success Test. The Target Number is 10 minus the alchemist's Magic Rating. The number of successes determines how many units are created. For every success rolled in the test, the alchemist produces one unit of orichalcum. If he rolls no successes, the circulation must continue for another 28 days. If the die roll result for the test is all ones, the process has been botched and the raw materials destroyed. Orichalcum is of tremendous value in making foci and has many other uses. A unit of orichalcum weighs only 10 grams.

 Foci

Many magical items, or foci, known to magicians of the Sixth World are described on p. 137, SRII, including spell foci, spirit foci, power foci, spell locks, and weapon foci. This section adds a new class of focus, the fetish, and expands the rules for spirit foci.

 Fetish Focus

The fetish focus is a new item. An expendable fetish that has been enchanted, a fetish focus can be used by a magician one time to enhance the casting of a spell. The spell need not require a fetish, but if it does, the use of the fetish focus fulfills that requirement. As with spell category foci, there are combat fetish foci, manipulation fetish foci, and so on.

Fetish foci are popular because, unlike other foci, making one is a relatively quick and fairly inexpensive process, and they can be used by any magician without bonding. The Fetish Focus Rating may be used in one of two ways. The magician may use a number of extra dice equal to the rating to assist the Success Test for casting the spell. The rating can also help resist Drain when casting a spell. To do so, the character adds a number of dice equal to the Fetish Rating to the dice rolled in the Drain Resistance Test. Unlike the extra dice provided by other foci, the magician may not split the extra dice equal to the Fetish Focus Rating between casting a spell and resisting Drain. The character must decide which of the two functions the focus will serve at the time he creates it. When using the fetish focus, he applies the entire rating in dice to that particular function. Once the dice provided by a fetish focus are used, the focus is rendered inert and is no longer usable. Fetish foci can only be used once.

 Spirit Focus

As described in the basic rules (p. 137, SRI), a spirit focus can be created for use when dealing with a specific type of spirit. A fire elemental focus, for example, is useless for conjuring other elementals, a forest-spirit focus will not impress a storm spirit, and so on. A character can also create watcher foci (see Watchers, p. 73). The benefits of a spirit focus do not apply to banishing or binding a free spirit (see True Names, pp. 77-79). A magician who knows the spirit's true name could build a spirit focus specifically for use against that spirit, however. Standard in every other way, that spirit focus would only enhance Success Tests directed against that individual spirit.

 Artificing

Artificing is the process used to actually make all the magical foci that magicians use (p. 137, SRII). Artificing requires an enchanting shop and the item to be enchanted, or the materials from which it will be made. First, however, the character must design the focus formula.

**Designing a Formula**
Before a magician can make a focus, he must have the formula. A focus formula is similar to a spell formula (see Spell Formulas, p. 114), and the designer must possess Magical Theory Skill to design a focus formula. Focus formulas are specific in type, rating, and form. If a character designs a formula for a Rating 2 power focus, it will not help him make a Rating 3 power focus. Further, each formula is unique and cannot be upgraded. Someone with the formula for a Rating 4 combat spell focus may not have a clue about how to design the formula for a Rating 5 combat spell focus (or Rating 3, for that matter). Nor would the formula for making a wand focus help in making a focus in the shape of a cloak.

Characters can either try to buy an existing formula or design their own. The base time to design a focus formula depends on the type of focus, per the Focus Design Table.

**Focus Design Table**

| Type | Base Time |
|---|---|
| Fetish Focus | 10 days |
| Spell Lock | 10 days |
| Specific Spell Focus | 10 days* |
| Spell Purpose Focus | 30 days |
| Spirit Focus | 30 days |
| Power Focus | 60 days |
| Weapon Focus | 60 days |

*Also requires the spell formula. See p. 137, SRII.

To create the focus formula, make a Magical Theory Test against a target number equal to the desired rating of the focus (or 2, whichever is higher). Divide the base time needed to accomplish the job by the number of successes. If no successes are rolled, then the formula is incomplete. The magician must spend the base time puzzling out where he went wrong, and then he can try again. He can make the attempt in one uninterrupted stretch or over several weeks, as it suits him.

Once the formula is finished, anyone with Enchanting Skill can use it to make that specific type of focus. The designer must specify the material basis of the focus (see below) at this time, which becomes part of the formula as well. Thus, the final formula might be: Rating 3 combat spell focus (wooden staff). The form is part of the formula as well as the function. However, the formula does allow for some variations. The same formula can serve to make foci using mundane materials, virgin materials, alchemical materials, and so on. Like spell formulas, focus formulas are too complex to be memorized, and both hermetic and shamanic formulas exist. Translating a formula from one tradition to the other is equivalent to designing one from scratch, but give a -2 modifier to the target number of the Magic Theory Test.

**Exotic Materials (Optional Rule)**
The exotic materials optional rule makes creating a focus more interesting (and possibly more difficult). When a focus formula is finished, roll 1D6. If the die result is less than or equal to the Focus Rating, the formula calls for an exotic material. If the Focus Rating is 6 or higher, the focus automatically requires one, and possibly more, types of exotic material. Subtract 6 from the rating, and roll again. Continue in this way until the Focus Rating is reduced to 0 or less. For example, a magician decides to make a focus with a Rating of 14. Because 14 is higher than 6, the focus automatically requires one exotic material. The remaining 8 (14 - 6) is still higher than 6, which means the focus requires two exotic elements. Roll 1D6. On a result of 1 or 2, a third exotic material would be required. Exotic materials can be built into the focus or used up in the process of enchanting it. The main issue is having the goods to do the job. If the required exotic material usually enhances the enchanting process, for example, alchemical materials, the focus requires the exotic material in addition to the standard requirements for that material. In other words, one exotic material cannot do double duty; the exotic-material requirement is in addition to anything the magician voluntarily decides to put into the focus.

Just how exotic can the materials be? Roll 2D6 and consult the following table of possibilities. Gamemasters are encouraged to use their imaginations to come up with others. When the focus designer hears what he must come up with to create his focus, he may decide he does not care for the requirements. Null perspiration, chummer. He can simply go back and redesign the formula, then see if the next batch of requirements is easier to live with.

**Exotic Materials Table** (Roll 2D6)

| Die Roll | Material |
|---|---|
| 2 | Some body part from a freshly killed dragon |
| 3 | 10 units of herbs from a remote corner of another continent |
| 4 | One unit of a metal alchemical radical |
| 5 | 1D6 x 10,000¥ worth of fine gems |
| 6 | One liter of blood from an Awakened critter |
| 7 | No exotic material required |
| 8 | One unit of an herbal alchemical radical |
| 9 | 1D6 x 10,000¥ worth of precious metals |
| 10 | A lock of hair (or feathers or scales) from an Awakened critter |
| 11 | 10 units of minerals from a remote corner of another continent |
| 12 | Some bodily fluid from a live dragon ("You want me to do WHAT in this cup?") |

**The Material Basis**
The item the character intends to enchant is the material basis of the focus, also called a **telesma**. The right material basis can make the job of enchanting easier and the Karma cost lower. Just about anything can serve as the telesma: a wooden wand, a jeweled charm, a weapon, a car, and so on.

It is also possible to buy something "off the shelf" and enchant it. This would constitute a **mundane telesma**, that is, the material basis is an ordinary item with no intrinsic magical affinity. Enchanting a mundane telesma adds no benefits to any Success Tests nor reduces the Karma it costs to make them. A character can also use a handmade telesma for the material basis, which is easier to enchant. Someone could also go out and gather the necessary raw materials and make a telesma from scratch. This is a **virgin telesma** and is magically attuned to the maker because of the preparations he has undertaken. Not only are these easier to enchant, but they cost less Karma to make. Virgin telesma are usually confined to items made with handicraft skills. (The amount of labor involved in making a virgin automobile is almost inconceivable. Refining or synthesizing the plastics, getting a sufficient amount of virgin metal, building an engine from the handmade parts—not particularly cost effective, is it?)

It is usually possible to make or buy and then enchant only a single telesma at a time. However, if the telesma for fetish foci are properly prepared, a character can process them in batches equal to his Intelligence Attribute. Treat all costs in time, tests, materials, and so on for this batch as for a single focus. That is, a magician with an Intelligence Attribute of 4 can make four identical fetish foci at one time. If the formula for these were for a Rating 3 focus (see below), all tests, Karma costs, and so on, would be as though for the creation of a single Rating 3 focus.

**Alchemical Materials**
Adding alchemical materials to the telesma makes it easier to enchant and will reduce the Karma cost as well. As already discussed, the three arcana of alchemy are the arcanum of herbs, the arcanum of minerals, and the arcanum of metals. Characters can use alchemical radicals from one of these arcana in the ritual of enchantment. They either become a part of the focus or are used up during the ritual, but it does not matter which. Qualifying for the alchemical materials bonus requires using a number of units of a radical from that arcanum in the ritual equal to the item's rating. For example, to get a "one arcanum" bonus when making a Rating 3 focus would require using three units of radicals from the same arcanum. The bonus can come from using one arcanum, two arcana, or all three. See the section on First Bonding, following.

Orichalcum can also be used in the ritual. Every unit of the mystic metal used reduces the target number for making the focus and a potential reduction in its Karma cost. Whether the materials are built into the focus or simply consumed during the ritual, they are bound to that focus and cannot be retrieved for any other purpose. Consider them expended.

**The Enchanting Test**
Once the magician buys or makes the telesma, the material basis of the focus, he can proceed to the enchantment itself. The rituals of enchanting take time, and as with alchemy, nothing else can distract the enchanter. He is constantly busy projecting astral energy through the telesma, making the correct observances of the sun and moon, casting horoscopes, chanting, dancing, and so on. A mage needs an enchanting library of a rating at least equal to his skill. A shaman must perform enchantments in a medicine lodge of a rating at least equal to his skill. If the library or lodge has a lower rating than the magician's skill, then use that number for the Success Test instead of the magician's Skill Rating.

The base time to enchant something is 30 days; the target number depends on the type of focus being made. Find the appropriate base target number on the Enchantment Table, adding any modifiers that apply.

**Enchantment Table**

| Item | Target Number |
|---|---|
| Fetish Focus | 3 |
| Power Focus | 8 |
| Specific Spell Focus | 4 |
| Spell Lock | * |
| Spell Purpose Focus | 6 |
| Spirit Focus | 6 |
| Weapon Focus | 6 |

**Modifiers**

| Modifier | Value |
|---|---|
| Rating of Focus | + Rating |
| Handmade Telesma | -1 |
| Virgin Telesma | -2 |
| Alchemical Materials (One Arcanum) | -1 |
| Alchemical Materials (Two Arcana) | -2 |
| Alchemical Materials (Three Arcana) | -4 |
| Orichalcum (per unit) | -1 |

*A spell lock always has a Rating 1. The Target Number for enchanting a spell lock is always 5.

To determine the length of the ritual, make an Enchanting Test. Divide the base time (30 days) by the number of successes generated. If the character generates no successes, he or she must keep the ritual going for a full 30 days and then try again. The character has to maintain the ritual without a break until he succeeds or until the whole enchantment fails and the materials are wasted. On a result of all ones, the process aborts and the materials are lost.

**First Bonding**
Having fulfilled the ritual for creating a focus, the magician must pay Karma to complete the enchantment. If he lacks the necessary Karma, the process is pointless; the enchantment aborts and the focus is useless. The materials are wasted. The Karma paid to complete the enchantment also bonds the focus, either to the maker or to any other person the maker chooses. If he is making the focus on commission for someone else, that person must be present for this "first bonding ." The person being bonded to the focus may pay some or all of the Karma involved, with the magician who created it paying the rest.

Karma costs for the first bonding are equal to a base amount multiplied by the rating of the item (see Bonding Cost Table). The use of virgin telesma, alchemical radicals, and orichalcum in the focus or enchanting ritual can reduce the base cost for bonding. If orichalcum is used to reduce bonding Karma costs, the units added to the enchanting process for this purpose are in addition to any used to enhance the enchanting target number. The minimum base cost for the first bonding is 1.

**Bonding Cost Table**

| Focus Type | Base Karma Cost |
|---|---|
| Spell Lock | 3* |
| Fetish Focus | 2 x Rating |
| Specific Spell Focus | 3 x Rating |
| Spell Purpose Focus | 5 x Rating |
| Spirit Focus | 4 x Rating |
| Power Focus | 7 x Rating |
| Weapon Focus | 8 x Rating |

*Spell locks always have a Rating of 1.

**Modifiers**

| Modifier | Value |
|---|---|
| Virgin Telesma | -2 x Rating |
| Alchemical Materials (One Arcanum) | -1 x Rating |
| Alchemical Materials (Two Arcana) | -2 x Rating |
| Alchemical Materials (Three Arcana) | -4 x Rating |
| Orichalcum (per extra unit) | -1 x Rating |

**Stacking Enchantments**
It is possible, but difficult, to make a focus that has multiple, or "stacked," purposes. A multipurpose focus might be a Rating 2 power/Rating 3 combat spell focus, for example. The target number for the formula design of a multipurpose focus is the sum of the ratings. In the above example, the Target Number would be 5. The resulting formula would be good only for building a similarly stacked focus. This specific multipurpose formula could not be used to design only a Rating 2 power focus or a Rating 3 combat spell focus. If using the exotic materials optional rule, the tests for exotic materials would also be based on the total rating of the focus. Similarly, any benefits derived from alchemical materials would require amounts of those material equal to the total rating.

The enchanter does get something of a "group discount" on the target number for enchanting the item. The target number for the ritual is equal to the highest applicable target number, plus half the base target number for any other functions the item has, plus the average of the ratings involved. For example, enchanting a power focus has a Base Target Number of 8, while enchanting a combat spell focus has a Base Target Number of 6. The higher score is 8, so the Base Target Number for the enchantment is 8 (highest target number) + 3 (half of lower target number), or 11. The Ratings are 2 and 3, for an average of 2.5, which rounds down to 2. The final Target Number for the Enchanting Test is 13. (Hope this chummer has some bonuses coming) .

The Karma cost for the first bonding is equal to the higher base cost, multiplied by the total rating for the focus. In our example, the Power Focus Base Cost is 5 and the Spell Purpose Focus Cost is only 3, so the base Karma cost to make or bond the item would be 25, or 5 times the total Rating of 5.

When bonding a stacked focus normally, the Karma for each function must be paid separately. The focus cannot be used until it is completely bonded, however. Bonding the above stacked focus, for example, requires a Karma cost of 5 x Rating for bonding the power foci, and a cost of 3 x Rating for bonding the spell purpose focus. Therefore, a new owner of the Power (2)/Combat Spell (3) Focus would have to pay 10 Karma Points to bond the power "part" of the focus, and 9 Karma Points to bond the combat spell function. That comes to a total of 19 Karma Points in all, and the character cannot use either power of the focus until he or she pays the whole amount.

**Bonding Foci**
Whether it was paid for or, ah, liberated, a focus will not work for a magician until it is bonded. This takes Karma. For powerful items, it takes lots of Karma. A magician can attempt to use Enchanting Skill during the creation process to reduce the amount of Karma ultimately required to bond the focus. He can use the skill on his own behalf or to bond a focus to another character. If using his skill for someone else, however, the player must modify the target number for the test by +2. This technique requires the use of an enchanting shop.

Make an Enchanting Test with a target number equal to the Focus Rating. For a stacked focus, this test must be made separately for each function of the focus. Reduce the bonding cost for the focus by -1 for every 2 successes scored in the Enchanting Test. The minimum cost is equal to the rating of the focus. For example, a Rating 4 weapon focus normally requires 24 Karma Points to bond. A magician with Enchanting Skill 5 rolls 5 dice, with a Target Number of 4 (the Focus Rating). If he scores 4 successes, the cost to bond the item is reduced by 2, to 22. This test can only be made once for a given focus and a given owner. It is not possible to knock off a few points here and a few more there when trying to bond an item.

Karma can be invested in bonding "a little at a time," however. For example, a character obtains a Weapon Focus (4) requiring 24 Karma Points to bond. Seeking out a friendly enchanter, he gets the cost reduced to 21. That is still a lot of Karma. If the character only has 8 points to spare at the moment, he can invest some or all of it in bonding the focus. Say he puts in all 8. After a few runs, he has accumulated 12 more Karma Points. He puts 6 in the weapon focus (a total of 14 points for bonding) and uses the rest for other purposes. A bit later, he picks up 7 more points and puts them into bonding the focus. That takes him up to 21 points of Karma, and the weapon is now bonded to him. If some other magician gets his hands on the focus and bonds it, any Karma the first magician invested in the process is lost.

The following Magical Item Bonding Table supersedes the Focus Bonding Table on p. 137, SRII.

**Magical Item Bonding Table**

| Item | Karma Cost |
|---|---|
| Fetish | None |
| Fetish Focus | None |
| Specific Spell Focus | 1 x Rating |
| Spell Category Focus | 3 x Rating |
| Spirit Focus | 2 x Rating |
| Power Focus | 5 x Rating |
| Weapon Focus | 6 x Rating |
| Spell Lock | 1 |

**Unique Enchantments**
Enchanting opens up some interesting possibilities for creating adventures. As described earlier, the search for materials can send the player characters off to the boondocks looking for rare herbs and minerals. They might even have the misfortune to end up on the wrong end of a ticked-off dragon. (Is there a right end of a ticked-off dragon?)

In addition to including these lighthearted exercises in the law of supply and demand in his or her adventures, the gamemaster can also use the concept of a **unique enchantment**. A unique enchantment is an object made using Enchanting Skill. It can be a focus, a specific alchemical radical, or even a fetish made with certain raw materials. It need not do anything in a direct magical sense, but should be necessary to fulfill some requirement of the adventure.

The section on foci touched briefly on a spirit focus being designed to conjure a specific free spirit. A unique enchantment used for similar purposes might be in the form of a trap (to hold a free spirit like a genie in a bottle) or a shrine or statue where the spirit can survive loss of mana (and, incidentally, leave traces of its astral signature). A spirit might even commission a magician to build this last toy, and encode its true name into the formula it gives the enchanter hired to build it. A unique enchantment could also require a magician to prepare quantities of some alchemical material to overcome an ancient magic too powerful for normal methods to defeat or even affect. A dragon who agrees to render the runners a service might request payment in the form of an unusual focus built to the specifications of an ancient formula. Of course, knowing dragons, the formula for this unique enchantment may involve a temple guarded by hordes of monsters.

Unique enchantments are special because although the focus or talisman has cosmic powers in the adventure designed to include it, it does not continue to give the shadowrunners cosmic power. The power of the object was unique!  It may have turned that particular toxic spirit into guacamole at just the right moment, but the runners don't have continuing access to a super-powerful "Turn Spirit to Guacamole" focus. It only works when the planets are in a particular alignment, see. But no problem! They'll be back in that pattern in another 127 years. Making unique enchantments or analyzing unique enchantments that the characters happen to find can add extra excitement to magically oriented adventures.

---

 Druids

Two types of druids can be found on the isles of Great Britain: the English druid, who practices hermetic magic, and the Celtic druid, who follows a shamanic path. The basic rules for playing a Celtic druid appear below, reprinted from the London Sourcebook and updated to conform to the Shadowrun, Second Edition rules. For more information on integrating the Celtic druid and additional information on the English druid, refer to the London Sourcebook. Though the English druids loosely follow the beliefs and orientation of the non-animal totems presented below, their discipline is essentially hermetic, and they do not gain or suffer from a totem's advantages and disadvantages. Rules and guidelines not mentioned specifically in this section stand unaltered from Shadowrun, Second Edition and the rules found elsewhere in this book.

 Totems

Druids revere the sun and the moon as primal forces of life, but they also respect animal totems as the focusing of life force into life forms. In addition to the non-animal Sun, Moon, Sea, and Oak totems, Celtic druids use the following: Eagle (largely Scottish), Wolf (Scottish only), Bear, Owl, Cat (Wildcat) and Wyrm (Welsh only). Explanations of the Moon, Oak, Sea, Sun, Wildcat, and Wyrm totems appear below. The others appear on pp. 120-22, SRII.

**Moon**
* **Characteristics**: The Moon is changeable and secretive. She sees much from her high vantage point, but her vision is not as clear as that of Sun. She keeps many secrets and may hide much from prying eyes. Moon is also the great transformer, ever changing, unknowable.
* **Favored Environment**: Wild places, far away from civilization, or the hidden corners of the city.
* **Advantages**: +2 dice for manipulation and illusion spells, +1 die for detection spells, +2 dice for conjuring water spirits.
* **Disadvantages**: A Moon shaman always takes the subtle approach. She must make a Willpower (4) Test in order to engage in direct confrontation. Negotiation is not considered confrontation (she loves discussion), but arguments do fall into that category. She suffers a -1 die modifier for combat spells. The Moon shaman prefers to keep a low profile and act through subterfuge.

**Oak**
* **Characteristics**: Oak is the strongest of trees, supremely patient and noble. He protects others, shielding small plants and moss from the harsh elements. Strong shields, buildings, and ships are made of Oak.
* **Favored Environment**: Deep forests, sacred groves, and towns built of its limbs.
* **Advantages**: +2 dice for health spells; +2 dice to conjure forest spirits and Spirits of Man in any structure constructed wholly or partly of oak.
* **Disadvantages**: An Oak shaman must be strong, and so anyone using this totem must assign a value of at least 4 to the Strength and Body Attributes during character generation. He is patient and does not rush into things without thorough consideration. He will steadfastly defend anyone he has sworn to protect, even to the point of his own destruction.

**Sea**
* **Characteristics**: The sea is the birthplace of all living creatures. She is unfathomable and moody. She can be tranquil and comforting, or fearsome and destructive. Though she possesses great wealth, she jealously guards what comes into her hands. The Sea can be a powerful ally, but she must be courted with the greatest of care.
* **Favored Environment**: On or near bodies of salt water.
* **Advantages**: +2 dice for health and transformation manipulation spells, +2 dice for conjuring salt-water spirits and ship spirits (hearth spirits).
* **Disadvantages**: A Sea shaman will not give anything away. She must receive at least token payment for any secret she reveals or object she lets pass out of her possession. What counts as suitable payment is completely up to the shaman, but will reflect her feelings toward the recipient. A loved one may receive a valuable artifact for the price of a kiss, while someone in disfavor with her will have to pay huge sums for the smallest gift. A Sea shaman is very proud and must make a Willpower (4) Test to avoid flying into a rage if insulted. While enraged, the shaman may yell, insult, or threaten, or even (if provoked further) actually attack the offender. The rage lasts 4 Combat Turns, but the shaman can reduce that time by 1 turn for every 2 successes achieved in a Willpower Test.

**Sun**
* **Characteristics**: The Sun is noble, heroic, flamboyant, and courageous. He must be seen by all, and serves as an example to everyone. The Sun is an inspiration to his followers and a natural leader by example. All living things draw sustenance from him. Sun represents a supreme power for creation as well as destruction. From his place in the highest heavens, he can observe all and rule justly.
* **Favored Environment**: Anywhere, but commonly in open places like -ills, fields, and even farming villages where he can be seen.
* **Advantages**: +2 dice for combat, health, and detection spells; +2 dice for conjuring any spirit in direct sunlight.
* **Disadvantages**: +2 to target number to conjure any spirit at night. A Sun shaman refuses to follow any cause he believes unjust. If he is deceived into supporting an unjust cause, he will attempt to redeem himself by opposing those who tricked him. As a natural leader, a Sun shaman must assign a value of at least 4 to the Charisma Attribute during character generation. These shamans maintain the highest possible standards for themselves and strive to excel at whatever they choose to do.

**Wildcat**
* **Characteristics**: Wildcat is wild, but not savage. She is independent, solitary, and a hunter. Her spirit is that of the wilderness, and she knows the wilderness as well as an owl knows night vision. Wildcat depends on her keen senses rather than intellect, but may still be easily deceived by appearances. She is far less cunning than her urban counterpart, but she is powerful and dangerous when provoked! 
* **Favored Environment**: Anywhere in the British Wild Lands (except Cornwall).
* **Advantages**: +2 dice for combat and health spells, +2 dice for conjuring any nature spirit during the hours of darkness.
* **Disadvantages**: A Wildcat shaman must never allow his home stone circle to be damaged or destroyed ; he will attack any creature attempting this, fighting to the death if necessary (he may not make tests of any kind to evade this responsibility!). Wildcat shamans also subtract 1 die from Spell Resistance Tests made against illusion spells. Wildcat is aggressive only when cornered or directly threatened; Wildcat shamans are not kamikaze killers.

**Wyrm**
* **Characteristics**: Wyrm is a great lizard, slow and ponderous, a nonmagical cousin to dragons or, some say, a stunted form akin to the axolotl. Wyrm is the totem proudly flourished by the Welsh Dragon shamans or Dragon druids (improperly self-named, it should be pointed out), who understand the affinity of their totem with the great national symbol of their land. Wyrm is not intelligent, nor is he swift. He is slow to act and unable to seize the initiative when events transpire rapidly. But he has strength, great recuperative powers, and is merciless once he has gained the upper hand over an enemy. He is peaceable, but unforgiving if provoked. Lastly, Wyrm has a singular power of will, and can dominate others simply by force of this will.
* **Favored Environment**: Mountains.
* **Advantages**: +2 dice for health and manipulation spells, +2 dice for conjuring mountain spirits.
* **Disadvantages**: Wyrm often does not know when to let go: if engaged in combat or another ongoing opposed activity (like playing out a session of the Druidic Stone Game), Wyrm must make a Willpower (6) Test to quit and do something else instead. Wyrm is also slow and lazy, and sleeps for lengthy periods. Wyrm shamans must sleep an average of at least 70 hours per week.

 Fetishes

Druids use only one reusable fetish: the golden sickle. They use only one expendable fetish: mistletoe. A druid may not buy his fetishes from a talismonger. The druid must gather his own mistletoe using a golden sickle. In order to be used as a fetish, the sickle must first be consecrated by an initiate of Grade 1 or higher at the former druid's home sacred circle. The consecration of the sickle occurs during the ritual initiating that druid as a Grade 0, and the aspirant druid must expend 1 point of Karma to bond his sickle to him. Otherwise, neither the sickle nor any mistletoe he gathers may be used as fetishes.

 Sacred Circles

Celtic druids do not maintain a medicine lodge as such. They have sacred circles, which are stone circles that serve as their meeting places. In some rare instances, a singular standing stone, sacred cave (such as the Dan Yr Ogof caves in the Dragon Land) or holy loch (for Scottish druids) can serve as their meeting place. Because the druidic faith emphasizes the unity of all nature, the circle need not be in the same environment as the druidic totem. However, every druid has a home circle, which is in an environment suitable to his totem, and special rules apply to aspects of his dealings with spirits at his home circle. The sacred circle is a number of meters in diameter equal to its rating. It is used in place of the medicine lodge (and generally follows the same rules) by druids learning spells and for other, related activities.

 Spirit Conjuring

A druidic shaman may conjure only certain nature spirits from among the many listed in Shadowrun, Second Edition. Note that druids following animal totems may never conjure Spirits of Man, but those who follow the non-animal totems may summon Spirits of Man without restriction. A druidic shaman can conjure the following nature spirits:

* **Spirits of the Land**: forest and mountain spirits
* **Spirits of the Sky**: mist and storm spirits
* **Spirits of the Waters**: lake, river, and sea spirits

Druids of animal totems can more easily conjure the above-named spirits than can most shamans because druids feel a more profound identification with nature. The innate magic of the places where they build their sacred circles (these magic places often reemerged and regenerated during the Awakening) also makes conjuring these spirits easier. Use the following rule modifiers for druidic conjuring:

* Any druid automatically adds 1 to his Conjuring Skill if he is within a number of miles, equal to his own Essence Rating, of a stone circle.
* Any druid automatically adds 3 to his Conjuring Skill for conjuring a spirit of the appropriate domain (this will almost always be mountain or forest) if within a number of miles, equal to his own Essence Rating, of his home sacred circle.
* Any druid of Grade 5 (or higher) initiation adds an additional 1 point to his Conjuring Skill under all circumstances.
* Any druid successfully conjuring a nature spirit can gain a number of uses of the spirit's power equal to the number of successes generated in the Conjuring Test plus 1, or plus 2 if at his own home circle.

For example, Arisaig, a Grade 7 druidic initiate, is trying to fend off an attack by thugs trying to raid his druidic circle for magic ; they got wind of the alchemical work he has been doing. He decides to teach them a lesson by conjuring a mountain spirit to attack them. He has a Conjuring Skill of 7, but gets to roll no fewer than 13 dice. That is, he gets a bonus of 3 because this is his home sacred circle, a further 1 because he is a sufficiently high grade of initiate, and a further 2 because he is a Wildcat shaman and the goons made the mistake of attacking at night. He calls for a spirit of Force Rating 6, and rolls the dice. His player rolls 4 sixes. Because he is at his home sacred circle, he adds 2 to the number of services (uses of spirit power) he can call upon, for a total of 6. The vengeful Wildcat shaman begins to will the series of accidents that the spirit will cause to befall his enemies.

 Spirit Special Rules

Nature spirits will remain to serve a druid longer than they will serve other summoners ; they remain for up to 24 hours, until the first dawn following their conjuring. Uncontrolled nature spirits are unlikely to attack a druidic shaman. The rules for commanding an uncontrolled spirit on p. 143, SRII, DO NOT apply. To determine if an uncontrolled spirit will attack the druid, make a Force Test for the spirit using the summoner's Magic Rating as the target number. If the spirit generates any successes, it attacks. Otherwise, the spirit simply vanishes.

Druids have superior skills at banishing nature spirits if they so choose (p. 143, SRII). The same bonuses apply to Conjuring Skill for the purposes of banishment (depending on location and initiate grade) as they do for conjuring itself, except in the rare case of one druid trying to banish a spirit conjured by another.

 Enchanting

This book covers enchanting in depth on pp. 20-27. The following special rule modifiers apply to druids.

 Enchanting Gear

Druidic enchanting gear is very different than that of other magicians. Druids do not need anything like 100,000¥ for alchemy or a 10,000-nuyen enchanting kit for talismongering. Their restrictions are quite different. They must always initiate enchanting operations at dawn on one of the great druidic festivals (Imbolc, Beltane, Lugnasad, Samhain). For talismongering or alchemy, druids need only a druidic cauldron and a supply of suitable raw materials (always plant material or minerals from sacred or exceptional sites such as Merlin's Cave or Fingal's Cave in the Hebridean Islands, or water from a holy loch). These cauldrons are passed on from druid to druid, and cannot be purchased. Every druid usually possesses two or three such, and only druidic initiates of Grade 5 or higher actually know how to make them (this takes some 20 days). A senior druid will always ask a junior for some definite, difficult service (such as trawling for a very obscure plant in a dangerous Wild Lands area packed with murderously nasty paranormal critters) before handing down a prized and precious cauldron. Rites performed with the cauldron must always use absolutely pure spring, lake, or loch water ; if in doubt, the druid can undertake a seven-dawn ritual purifying the water at a stone circle (no tests required; it just slows the druid up). The Gathering Test (p. 21) for plant materials is easier for druids, who use a Target Number of 3. If assisted by a nature spirit, the standard Spirit Force Rating bonus applies. Druids find making alchemical radicals (Making Radicals, p. 22) with plant materials much easier than do other magicians. To determine the success of this operation, they add a bonus 2 dice to their Enchanting Skill Test roll.

 Foci

Druidic enchanting is almost entirely limited to spirit foci and power foci (though druids with more aggressive totems such as Wildcat have been known to be fairly enthusiastic about weapon foci). Druids who must use exotic materials in their foci (p. 25), find them to be almost invariably herbal and available within the homeland of the druid (roll of 2-10 on 2D6; 11-12 means the component is mineral, but still available within the homeland). The material basis for the focus must always be a virgin telesma (p. 25). Druids attempting to make a nature spirit focus use a Target Number of 5 rather than the usual 6. Lastly, druids only rarely bond magical items other than those of their own making. If one ever chooses to do so, the Karma cost is 50 percent higher than the values listed on the Magical Item Bonding Table, p. 27.

 Human Sacrifice

The following information on blood magic is given to assist the gamemaster ONLY for purposes of plot device. NO player character will EVER learn the rituals needed to perform this magic. NOT EVER. It is exclusively the province of non-player character druids, who will not reveal the ritual to anyone of whom they do not have utter and complete knowledge. See Sacrifice Geas, p. 53, for a related game rule. The ritualistic basis of gaining something important from human sacrifice is known to only the highest-level druidic initiates. With a ritual sacrifice undertaken at the first light of dawn at the great druidic festivals, a druidic initiate of this grade can effect a human sacrifice at his home sacred circle, given the presence of at least six other druids of any initiate grade(s). Using a human sacrifice, he can strengthen an ally or free spirit or use the blood of the sacrificed victim to purify the land. See Chapter 14 of the Shadowrun novel, *Choose Your Enemies Carefully*, for ideas on how to set this ritual in a story.

 Background Count and Druidic Magic

The magical effects that operate as a result of the background count of ley lines are fairly straightforward in game terms: the level of background count is applied as a negative modifier (i.e., -2) to the target number for all magical tests performed by druids that do not actively oppose the nature of the site. Spells, (researches, and so on) that would damage the site do not receive this modifier ; in fact, characters performing these activities would add the modifier, tripled, as a penalty to the target number for the magical operation, if appropriate. Use of polluting spells, bringing a toxic spirit conjured elsewhere into the area and maintaining control of it, and displays of area-effect gross damage magic will similarly be hindered rather than aided. Some gamemaster discretion is needed here. Try thinking like a stone circle many thousands of years old: Does Stonehenge like this spell?  Does it feel right here?  The druid usually gets the benefit of the doubt. Enemies who attack druids near ley lines receive a penalty modifier (i.e., +2) to the target number equal to the background count for all magical tests.

Background count value for grand lodges on minor leys is 1 ; for those on great leys, it is 3, with the following exceptions: Stonehenge, the Sunken Island, Warwick Castle, and Caerleon have a Background Count of 4. Some special isolated sites on minor leys have a Background Count of 5; examples include the vast quartz-lined Camglaze Caverns of Cornwall, the stalagmite-encrusted limestone cave complex at Cheddar in Somerset, and Fingal's Cave in the Scottish Hebrides Islands. Certain sites may have special effects in game terms. The gamemaster can design these individually, but it is known that salamanders (pp. 136-37, *Paranormal Animals of North America*) and both watcher and guardian spirits (p. 73, and p. 76, respectively) seem to arrive unannounced at certain sites, be they stone circles or standing stones. Special effects on spirit conjuring may well exist at different sites if the gamemaster desires.

 Cornish Bards

A few shamanic druids inhabit the Cornish Wild Lands. They term themselves druids, and they do have some characteristics linking them with their Celtic brethren. They are rural dwellers, have suitable totems (Eagle, Wildcat, and Owl being the most common), they meet at stone circles and related sacred sites, and in game terms and for rules purposes, they are certainly shamanic. They do not, however, have magical groups or grades of initiation, and they are generally simple souls with a fairly primitive attitude toward alliance with nature. Many are simply shamanic adepts.

One factor that marks them out as distinctly unusual is their bardic emphasis. Cornish druids learn the Cornish tongue and the recitation of epic poems and lays in that (very obscure) language. They are an exception to the normal game rule that only initiates can use metamagic (pp. 42-50) ; they appear able to use Centering Skill against Drain (and possibly for other operations) using poetic recitation. At least some of the Cornish druids are also believed to have links with the Breton druids of Broceliande Forest and its environs. A number of Cornish bard-druids from Tintagel are known to have visited their French cousins at the Broceliande site where Vivien allegedly imprisoned Merlin within a tree.

---

 Adepts

The following section expands on the adept rules presented on pp. 124-26, SRII. As always, the gamemaster and players should agree on which, if any, of these rules to use before beginning play.

 Elemental Adepts

Elemental adepts are the hermetic equivalent of shamanic adepts. The adept is strongly aligned with one of the hermetic elements: air, earth, fire, or water. The adept may only cast spells or conjure spirits associated with that element (for example, a fire adept may only cast elemental effect (fire) combat or damaging manipulation spells, conjure fire elementals, and so on). They may also cast spells within their chosen element's area of influence:

* **Air** - Detection
* **Earth** - Manipulation (physical, matter-based only)
* **Fire** - Combat (any, as long as no elemental effect other than fire is involved)
* **Water** - Illusion

Elemental adepts have full and normal access to astral space (both projection and perception). They may use any foci which aid their areas of skill.

 Physical Adepts

Physical adepts are explained in detail on p. 125, SRII. This section expands the powers and skills physical adepts may add to their repertoire.

 Additional Powers

**Attribute Boost**
* **Cost**: 0.5/level
The adept with attribute boost power can call upon his inner self, enabling him to perform amazing physical feats far beyond those of which he is normally capable. The attribute boost power can be purchased for any of the Physical Attributes: Strength, Body, or Quickness. It cannot be purchased for a Mental Attribute, nor for Reaction, and must be purchased individually and separately for each of the three Physical Attributes. The level purchased is the number of Rating Points by which the attribute is boosted. To gain the boost, the physical adept must make a Success Test, rolling a number of dice equal to his current Magic Rating against a target number equal to the current value of the Attribute being boosted. If he rolls no successes, the Attribute remains at its current level. If the character achieves any successes, the Attribute is boosted by the full number of Rating Points. The boost lasts only for a number of Combat Turns equal to the number of successes generated in the Magic Test.

When the boost runs out, the physical adept must make a Drain Test, of sorts, to determine if he was weakened by the boost. The Drain target number is equal to one-half (round down) the boosted Attribute value. The Drain Level is based on the level of the boosted Attribute Rating compared to the character's Racial Maximum for that Attribute per the Attribute Boost Drain Table.

**Attribute Boost Drain Table**

| Boosted Attribute Rating | Drain Level |
|---|---|
| Less than or equal to 1/2 Racial Maximum | L |
| Up to Racial Maximum | M |
| Up to 1.5 x Racial Maximum | S |
| Beyond 1.5 x Racial Maximum | D |

As with a regular Drain Resistance Test, to offset the Drain the character must make a Willpower Test against the Drain target number. Every 2 successes generated reduces the Drain Level by one level. Drain damage is taken as Stun damage. The attribute boost power is not compatible with any form of cybernetic or bioware enhancements, nor spell-based increases. It is compatible with the physical adept ability Improved Physical Attributes (see p. 125, SRII).

**Body Control**
* **Cost**: 0.5 per level
The physical adept using the body control power has such control over his or her own body that he or she can resist the effects of gases, drugs, and poisons. Each level of the body control power purchased gives the character one additional die to use in the Damage Resistance Test against such toxins.

**Enhanced Centering**
* **Cost**: 2 per Skill Category
This ability allows the initiate physical adept to apply his or her Centering Skill to a non-physical skill. The area to which the adept may apply the Centering Skill must be purchased individually. Nonphysical skills that benefit from Enhanced Centering are: Build/Repair, Combat, Knowledge, Language, Magical, Social, Technical, and Vehicle. Enhanced Centering can also apply to Special Skills, but at a cost of 1 per Special Skill. Even with this power, physical adepts may still only use magical skills for mundane effects; they may not cast spells.

**Missile Parry**
* **Cost**: 1 point
With this ability, the physical adept can pluck slow-moving missile weapons such as arrows, thrown knives, or shuriken out of the air. To perform this feat, the character must roll a number of dice equal to his Reaction Attribute (plus Combat Pool dice, if the player so chooses) against a target number equal to 10 minus the range-determined base target number for the incoming attack. For example, to catch an arrow shot at long range, the adept has a Target Number 2 (10-8). If the attack were made at short range, his Target Number would be 6 (10 - 4). To successfully grab the missile weapon out of the air, the character must generate more successes in his Reaction Test than the attacker generated in the Attack Test. Ties go to the attacker. Use of this ability requires a Free Action.

**Mystic Armor**
* **Cost**: 1 per point
The adept is able to magically toughen his own skin and resist the effects of impact damage. Note also that Mystic Armor is cumulative with worn impact armor. An adept character may add points of the mystic armor power up to a maximum equal to his or her current Magic Rating.

**Suspended State**
* **Cost**: 1 point
The suspended state ability works in a similar manner to the magic spell of hibernate. It allows the physical adept to place himself into a meditative state that slows his body's metabolism and therefore lowers its requirements for food, water, air, and rate of bleeding. To determine the effectiveness of the suspended state, roll a number of dice equal to the character's Willpower, adding any meditative Special Skill dice available, against a Target Number of 4, applying any applicable injury modifiers. Consult the description of the hibernate spell (p. 157, SRII) and use any successes generated as indicated.

---

 Ritual Magic

Information on ritual magic appears on pp. 133-36 of the Shadowrun, Second Edition rulebook. The following rules expand upon the concept of the material link (see p. 135, SRII). In ritual magic, the material link is used to perform a ritual if the actual target is out of sight, serving as a connection between the magic involved and the target, and in some manner representing that target. Under the existing rules, this link must be a physical piece of the target, be it a biological sample or a piece of a building's structure. Using the optional rules presented here, something less directly connected to the target may be used instead.

 Symbolic/Sympathetic Links

If the players and the gamemaster agree to use the optional material-link rules, the character may attempt to make the magical link using something less concrete than an actual tissue or structure sample. Objects closely tied to the target will work (sympathetic), as will symbolic representations of the target. Modify the target number for the Material Link Test by the number shown in the optional Links Table.

**Optional Links Table***

| Material | Modifier |
|---|---|
| Favored Object | +4 |
| Often-Handled Object | +6 |
| Recently Handled Object | +8 |
| Symbolic Representation | +12 |

**Table Key**
* **Favored Objects** include jewelry or articles of clothing frequently worn by the target that have some emotional value to the Target. A dead lover's locket, now worn continually, and other such objects fit into this category. The key to using such an object is its emotional value to the target.
* **Often-Handled Objects** include frequently worn clothing, a favorite pen or pillow, a favorite weapon (long used), and so on. The key here is that the object is used often by the target and has been in the target's possession for some time.
* **Recently Handled Objects** are exactly that. If the target recently handled an object, that object may be used as a material link for a number of minutes equal to twice the target's Essence. If the ritual begins before that time runs out, the link remains for the entire ritual. If the ritual is interrupted, the link is lost. However, this object cannot have emotional value (qualifying it as a Favored Object) for someone other than the target.
* **Symbolic Representations** include drawings, paintings, dolls, and other media that resemble the target. The maker of the representation must make a Special Skill Test for that art form against a Target Number of 4 using the modifiers from the Representation Modifiers Table.

**Representation Modifiers Table**

| Condition | Modifier |
|---|---|
| Is familiar with the target | +0 |
| Has met the target | +2 |
| Has only seen the target | +4 |
| Saw target more than 1 month ago | +6 |
| Has assensed the target | -2 |
| The target is in view during the artist's efforts or for a period of time equal to the artist's Willpower in minutes | -1 |

 Tissue Sample Viability

Many players consider the length of time a tissue sample remains usable as a material link a vital issue. In general terms, tissue samples remain viable for varying amounts of time under different circumstances. A sample retrieved without a special ritual or a special purpose (such as blood dripped on a carpet, and so on) will last a number of hours equal to the Essence of the person it belonged to. So, a chromed-to-the-gills street samurai won't have to worry much beyond a half hour (Essence of .5), while his mage companion is going to be sweating for the next six hours (Essence of 6). Samples gathered with a minor ritual will last longer, but require a Sorcery (Forensic Magic) Test (Specialization: Sample Gathering) against a Target Number of 4. Multiply the number of successes from this test by the subject's Essence to determine the time in hours that the sample will now endure. Some forensic mages are rumored to use a spell called sample stasis that functions in a manner similar to the hibernate spell (see p. 157, SRII). Samples provided intentionally by the subject last for a number of days equal to the subject's Essence. If given intentionally and gathered according to a ritual (with sorcery), the sample lasts permanently. Magical groups often use this last procedure to ensure obedience to the rules of their group.

"The magic keeps you on your toes. Just when you think you know something, you find you have to learn it all over again." 

---

 Initiation

"There is always more."  For a time, there was no magic, and when it returned its new acolytes began quickly to explore, experiment, and learn. As new arts are rediscovered and refined, so too are new layers to magic uncovered. There are layers to all things ; spaces behind curtains, and more curtains beyond the spaces. As a magician becomes worthy, the curtains part (or can be parted) and greater knowledge obtained. Are there mysteries higher than have been revealed thus far?  Bet on it.

Through initiation a magician, be he hermetic or shamanic, is awakened to the greater powers of the higher worlds. Initiation sharpens his sensitivity to magical energy and purifies his system, allowing him to handle more power. It gives him the capacity to wield greater magical ability: metamagic, thus providing him access to the metaplanes of reality. Magicians who tie their religion and their magic together say it brings them closer to their god or gods. Are they right? Who can say for sure? 

A magician can become initiated through solo work or as a member of a magical group (see Magic Groups, p. 54). Initiation through a group is easier because the other group members can assist the process. Groups, however, are secretive and difficult to find. They are selective about who they permit to join, and members must abide by their rules. Some magicians find that group membership is not worth the trouble. Though joining a group means that a magician's initiation will cost him less Karma, some magicians find it worth spending the extra Karma not to hassle with groups.

Initiation does not occur either automatically or easily. The magician must prove his or her worth by undergoing some form of difficult test or hardship. Only once the magician has proven his worth can he tap into the higher mysteries. More difficult forms of initiation involve ordeals. The nature and specifics of ordeals are discussed later in this section.

 Grades of Initiation

Initiation is measured in grades, starting with **Grade 0** (signifying basic initiation) and moving upward. When a character completes his first initiation, he becomes a Grade 0 initiate. When he completes his second, he is a Grade 1 initiate, and so on. This kind of grading owes more to the hermetic system than the shamanic tradition, which does not dwell on numbers or other linear measures of magical progress. In a game system, on the other hand, numbers help to keep track of any magician's progress. The initiate grading system is used for both hermetic and shamanic magicians.

 Advantages of Initiation

Becoming an initiate (even Grade 0) allows the magician the use of **metamagic** (see Metamagic, p. 42) and gives him access to the metaplanes of astral space (see Metaplanes, p. 93). Becoming an initiate also increases the magician's Magic Attribute Rating because the Initiate Grade Rating is now added to the Magic Attribute. This increase does not actually occur until the magician reaches Grade 1 ; adding 0 (for Grade 0) to the existing Magic Attribute Rating results in no increase. The initiate also gains advantages in carrying out various magical operations because, again, he or she adds the Initiate Grade Rating to his other ratings. The initiate grade acts as a bonus only in certain situations which are specifically noted throughout these rules.

Each time a magician "takes" an initiation (attempts to increase his grade), he can try to get rid of a **geas**, a restriction on a magician's abilities. Geasa (plural for geas) are described in Geasa, p. 52. To shed a geas at the time of initiation, the magician makes a Willpower Success Test against a Target Number 6 plus the total number of Magic Points the magician has lost to damage and other sources. (See also Magicians and Damage, p. 115, SRII) . One or more successes lets the initiate eliminate one of his geasa (player's choice). He or she can purge only one geas at a time, however. To eliminate another, the magician must wait until he completes his next grade of initiation.

Once a magician reaches a certain level of initiation, he automatically gains new abilities. Physical adepts, for example, gain access to additional physical adept abilities (see Additional Powers, p. 34) simply upon achieving initiation. Because each grade of initiation beyond Grade 0 adds another point to the adept's Magic Attribute Rating, the character can use the point to "purchase" additional abilities (or can choose to save the point for later use), according to the Physical Adept rules, p. 125, SRII.

Another advantage is that initiates receive a bonus to their Astral Reaction equal to their Initiate Grade Rating. They also gain access to a new Astral Pool (containing a number of dice equal to their Initiate Grade Rating) that they can use for anything to which the regular Astral Combat Pool or the Magic Pool (while in astral space) applies. Dice in this Astral Pool refresh per the normal Dice Pool rules (see pp. 84-85, SRII). Other types of magicians receive other new abilities, but those fall within the realm of metamagic and are covered in that section. See Metamagic, p. 42.

 Karma and Initiation

The higher the initiate grade the magician wishes to achieve, the more Karma it costs (surprise!). To determine the basic cost of an initiation, add 6 to the grade the character is attempting to reach. As always in Shadowrun, the more skilled the character is, the harder it gets to improve. The actual Karma cost depends on whether the magician is solo or working in a group. (See Magic Groups, p. 54) . In a group he pays less Karma because the other members of the group are helping him.

**Initiation Costs Table** (Base Cost = 6 + desired Grade)

| Type | Cost |
|---|---|
| Self-initiation | Base Cost x 3 |
| Group initiation | Base Cost x 2 |

Reduce the multiplier by 0.5 if the character undergoes an ordeal as part of the initiation (see below). That is, self-initiation with an ordeal costs 2.5 x the base cost, and group initiation with an ordeal costs 1.5 x the base cost. Always round down. The Karma Cost for initiation is always paid from the character's total Good Karma (see p. 190, SRII).

 Ordeals

The ordeal is the test of a magician's worthiness to become an initiate. Only ordeals that are difficult and dangerous truly test a magician. The more difficult the ordeal, the greater the discount on the Karma Cost of initiation by 0.5. The higher Karma Cost for initiation without a specific ordeal represents all the time and effort the magician must invest in all the little ordeals that will confront him when attempting to achieve a new grade of initiation. Don't try to fool the cosmos, chummer.

Each ordeal should be different. The only time an ordeal can be repeated is with the gamemaster's permission. Certain ordeals, such as oath, cannot be repeated. The players and the gamemaster should work together to choose ordeals appropriate to a character's temperament, philosophy, goals, and so on. Only if the gamemaster agrees may an initiate repeat an ordeal. The magician must choose the ordeal before taking an initiation and after paying the Karma Cost for that initiation. He cannot "get the ordeal out of the way" ahead of time, with the exception of a deed (see below). Having submitted to the ordeal, the initiate obtains his new grade. Once a character has specified the ordeal he will perform, he cannot change it. If at first he don't succeed, he better try again, 'cause he ain't advancing any further until he does.

 Ordeal Types

**Astral Quest**
The astral quest is available only to initiates because it requires projection to the metaplanes of astral space (see Metaplanes, p. 93). A shaman must journey astrally to the metaplane of his totem. A hermetic mage has it rougher, for he must fulfill a quest on each of the elemental metaplanes: fire, water, air, and earth. The rating of any quest is equal to twice the grade the magician is seeking. This makes an ordeal relatively easy at the lower levels of initiation, but quite challenging at the higher ones. An elemental adept need only accomplish a single quest to the metaplane of his affiliation, but the Quest Rating increases by 50 percent. Thus, an elemental adept's astral quest initiation would have an effective rating of 3 x the grade desired. Because physical adepts are unable to astrally project, they cannot undertake an astral quest unless they have access to the astral gateway power of a free spirit (see Powers of Free Spirits, p. 79). Otherwise, normal astral quest rules apply.

If the magician fails the quest, he must wait to repeat it, strengthening himself through ritual and meditation. To do so, he makes a Willpower Test against a target number equal to the grade he is attempting. The base time for this preparation is 10 days. The character divides the base time by any successes from the Willpower Test to reduce the actual time he must wait to reattempt the quest. If the player rolls no successes, he makes another test, but the base time increases by 10 days (i.e., 20 days on the second try, 30 days on a third test, and so on). He continues this way until he makes a successful test and can determine the actual time it will take him to prepare to reattempt the quest. The magician must give all his attention to the task for this many days, but he can do so in segments, spending a few days here, a few days there. During this period of preparation, he may not engage in other activities such as healing, studying, and so on. Once this time has elapsed, he may again attempt the astral quest. If a mage fails on one metaplane, he must repeat that quest, but does not have to go back and re-do any quests that have already succeeded. If the gamemaster agrees to allow a character to take the astral quest ordeal for multiple initiations, increase the Quest Rating for each astral quest after the first by +2. This increase applies only to astral quests used for initiation. For details on executing an astral quest, see Metaplaces, p. 94.

**Asceticism**
An ascetism ordeal involves activities such as rigorous fasting, strenuous yoga-type exercises, ritual combat, or other physically dangerous practices. This ordeal requires that the magician give up one point of one Physical Attribute. This is a reduction to the Attribute's natural value; augmented Rating Points (from cyberware, magic, or physical-adept abilities) can never be sacrificed as part of this ordeal. In addition, the character's effective Racial Maximum for that same Attribute also decreases by 1 point, thereby reducing the maximum potential value of that Attribute. Any future Attribute increases bought with Karma, however, are paid for as if the Attribute being raised were one higher than it actually is. For example, a shaman who had at some time in the past taken this ordeal and reduced his Body from 4 to 3 wishes to raise that Attribute 1 point with Karma. Because a character must pay a number of Good Karma Points equal to the rating to which the Attribute is being raised, the shaman must pay 5 Karma Points (he pays Karma to raise his Attribute 1 point as if he had a Body of 4). The magician loses the Physical Attribute Point because this ordeal is based on a physically taxing activity of some type. The magician cannot sacrifice a point from an Attribute that has a value of 1. If this ordeal is taken multiple times, a character must reduce a different Physical Attribute before he can reduce a previously reduced Attribute again.

**Deed**
A deed ordeal requires the magician to perform some task (quite possibly a shadowrun) with a goal appropriate to his magical group (if he has one), or his totem (if a shaman), or his moral code (if he has one of those). Successfully accomplishing this goal makes it a deed. The gamemaster and the magician player can agree on a deed in advance. Alternatively, the gamemaster can decide that a run the magician has just completed fits the bill. The magician earns absolutely no Karma for that run, however. Gamemasters should note that it is not a good idea to permit a run to serve as a deed if the only Karma the magician character has coming is the 1-point payoff for surviving a run or if the run ended up a hosed-up mess. As a good guideline, the gamemaster can judge that a run qualifies as a deed if the Karma earned from it is numerically comparable to the grade the magician seeks to obtain. Remember, though, that the magician gains no Karma from completing the run if the run is declared a deed ordeal.

The gamemaster has a lot of leeway, depending on his particular players and game situation. If he approves the run as a deed, the player-magician merely turns down his Karma Award for the run, and bingo, the ordeal is accomplished. Note that the magician can carry out a deed before he is ready to take another grade. In other words, he can "save" the deed and use it as the ordeal for his next initiation. Use it or lose it, however. A player can only save up a deed until his character's next initiation. The gamemaster is, as always, the final arbiter.

Deeds should be appropriate to the magician's goals and ethics or those of any group he has joined. Some runs that might qualify for a deed are:
* The magician has overcome some kind of magical evil or threat to life on Earth.
* The magician has helped defend someone from wrongful persecution or death.
* The magician has experienced powerful magic, been in the presence of great spirits, gone on an astral quest for some great end (other than as an initiation ordeal), or in some other way widened his or her experience of magic.
* The magician has lived up to his magical and/or ethical codes, been true to his totem or the strictures of a group, or simply behaved in a manner that the gamemaster judges appropriate.

Gamemasters should be cautious about simply declaring previous shadowruns as deeds. The action taken must be personally relevant or appropriate to the magician. It is not acceptable to simply declare that a run qualifies as a deed merely because it earned high Karma.

**Familiar**
This ordeal requires the magician to conjure up an ally (see Allies, p. 67), which automatically costs as much Karma as the initiation itself. Though conjuring an ally usually costs the permanent loss of 1 Magic Point as well as Karma, the ally conjured for this ordeal does not cost a Magic Point. If, however, this ally is banished, goes "free," or is destroyed any time in the future, the magician makes a test to see if he loses Magic Points, just as though he had taken a Deadly wound (p. 115, SRII). This ally will be more loyal than the usual run of spirits and is less likely to go "free" on its creator. This aspect of the ally, however, is for the gamemaster to determine.

**Geas**
To fulfill this ordeal, the magician simply takes on a geas of his choice, choosing a ritual which he must use to perform magic or accepting a limitation on using it. The magician may choose one of the standard geasa found in the Geasa section or may create one of his own. The magician accepts this geas for life. It cannot be canceled out in a later initiation. See Geasa, p. 52.

**Meditation**
The magician spends time in daily meditation, trying to bring his physical being under his mind's control. He must pass three Attribute Success Tests:
* A Charisma Test with a target number equal to his Strength and a base time of his current Initiate Grade Rating x 4 days.
* An Intelligence Test with a target number equal to his Quickness and a base time of his current Grade Rating x 4 days.
* A Willpower Test with a target number equal to his Body and a base time of his current Grade Rating x 4 days.

Unless all three tests are successful, the magician must begin the meditative cycle again. No other activity (studying, healing, learning, training, or, of course, shadowrunning) is permitted during this time. The magician makes the three meditation ordeal tests at +2 to the target numbers if his lifestyle is less than Low (p. 189, SRII). Living in the wild during this period incurs no penalty if the magician has some form of Wilderness or Survival Skill of 4 or more ; otherwise, the +2 penalty applies. The idea is that the magician must be able to concentrate on the meditation process without too many distractions from his environment.

**Oath**
The oath ordeal, in which the magician swears an oath to obey a magical group's rules and strictures, is available only to members of such groups (see Magical Groups, p. 54). If the character is ever expelled or resigns from the group, he may lose 1 point of Magic Skill. Some groups require this ordeal of all new members. Even if a magician swears several membership oaths in his career, only the first one qualifies as an ordeal for initiation purposes. If, however, the magician loses his membership in a group to which he has sworn an oath, he makes a test to see if he loses a Magic Point as though he had taken a Deadly wound (p. 115, SRII), even if this is not his first oath. A magical oath is not taken lightly, and the penalties for breaking one can be severe. The oath ordeal cannot be repeated.

**Thesis**
The thesis ordeal requires a magician to create a master formula that contains all he is as a magician and everything he knows at that point in his life. Hermetic theses are usually written texts. Shamanic theses are usually artworks, expressing the spiritual insights of the maker. The thesis loses its effectiveness if it is stored only electronically. It must exist physically. The thesis is created in the same way as a spell formula (see Spell Formulas, p. 114). The author must guard the thesis carefully because anyone who obtains a copy can use it as a material link to target the author via ritual sorcery (p. 135, SRII, and Spell Link, p. 49 of this book). For this reason, initiates are reluctant to make more than one copy of a thesis. If all the copies are destroyed, however, the initiate immediately loses 1 Magic Point. And so magicians get nervous if only one copy is in existence. Nice little dilemma, don'tcha think?  Some magical groups that try to control their members require this ordeal. The thesis is usually the second initiation an individual undertakes with them, as these same groups tend to require an oath in the first initiation. They also require that members file a copy of their thesis with the group, as it acts as a link for ritual sorcery. Frag with the group, and who knows what might come popping outta astral space some dark night.

---

 Metamagic

Metamagic is magic that only a magician who has been initiated can perform. Metamagic controls magic itself. The six basic types of metamagic available to initiates are centering, quickening, dispelling, shielding, masking, and anchoring.

* **Centering** is a ritual technique that assists the initiate in controlling the way his body channels magical energy. It can reduce Drain, overcome penalties for wounds or fatigue when using magic, and overcome some environmental penalties that affect magic and magicians.
* **Quickening** allows a magician to make the effect of a sustained spell permanent without need of a spell lock.
* **Dispelling** cancels out magical effects without having to "kill" them in astral combat.
* **Shielding** allows an initiate to use a more powerful form of spell defense to counter hostile magic.
* **Masking** lets the initiate disguise his aura in astral space and to pierce such disguises by others.
* **Anchoring** allows an initiate to attach spells to places or objects and then delay their activation until a certain event occurs.

 Centering

For centuries, magicians of many countries and traditions have studied such skills as singing, dancing, playing musical instruments, speaking ancient languages, and so on. Since the Awakening, initiates in various traditions have discovered the reason behind the practice. The mental and physical discipline involved in performing the skill help the magician to focus his will, enhancing his ability to handle magic without suffering harm. Performance of these skills centers him; puts him in harmony with the center of his being, the well from which all magic springs.

Centering can reduce the Drain of magic or act as a countermeasure to various penalties affecting magical target numbers. It operates by using a non-magical skill as a focus for the magician's concentration. It can also help specialized magicians like physical adepts to focus their concentration against distractions.

 Centering Skills

The magician must use a **Centering Skill**. This is a Special Skill (see p. 74, SRII) essentially dedicated to magical purposes, and usually one related to artistic or intellectual endeavors. The following list describes some general types. The actual Centering Skill might be a Special Skill of Classical Greek or the Special Skill of Guitar. Almost any kind of artistic or introspective skill is appropriate for use as a Centering Skill, but few are usable as quickly and with as little preparation as might be required in combat or other time-critical situations. The gamemaster is the final arbiter of whether or not a certain Special Skill is usable as a Centering Skill and what restrictions might apply to its use. The following sample selections are generally acceptable for use quickly, except where noted.

* **Dancing**: The magician weaves his spell as he dances. Dancing as a Centering Skill is more common among shamans, but it is not exclusive to that magical tradition. When using Dancing Skill, the magician chooses a traditional dance style from the culture in which his magic has its roots.
* **Singing**: The magician sings as he does his magic. This singing can range from chant to nova-hot rock, or fall anywhere in between. Magical traditions tell of bards who can make magic with their songs, and the priests and magicians of Native American tribes such as the Navaho are often notable singers.
* **Playing Musical Instruments**: The magician plays an instrument to center himself. According to legend, magicians have used drums, harps, pipes, horns, even violins. In the Sixth World, magicians also use electric guitars, maxaphones, ultra-synths, even synthlink rigs if they decide to get the cyber for them (though setup and preparation time might be a problem). The use of drumming is well-documented in the shamanic traditions as an example of the use of a musical instrument. Oriental magicians are said to favor the music of bamboo flutes as a centering technique.
* **Ancient or Arcane Languages**: The magician may utter his spells in an ancient language or one that has magical potency. Hermetic magic in the West has used Latin, Greek, and Hebrew for centuries. There are also languages of unknown origin, such as the Enochian tongue, first documented in the 16th century by the Elizabethan mage John Dee. This language is supposed to have great magical power. Many traditions use the ancient language of their country of origin for magical purposes. Magicians in the northern European countries often chant the ancient runes, the letters in which the epic eddas of their ancestors were written, as a centering technique.
* **Meditation**: The magician composes his mind in meditation to center himself. This may also be a form of moving meditation, like the ancient Chinese tai chi, or one performed at rest, such as yoga or Japanese zazen.

 Choosing Centering Skills

Some players will no doubt want to invent new Centering Skills, and that is fine. Though the Awakening made magicians understand and value the old traditions of their art, it also set off a wave of experimentation to find new and better ways of magic. For purposes of game balance, however, Centering Skills should not be ones particularly useful in non-magical areas. For example, consider the possibilities of shooting a gun as a Centering Skill. A case could be made for using it or other Armed and Unarmed Combat Skills for centering, based on the zen qualities of marksmanship involved in a skill like archery. This would, however, give the magician the advantage of being able to physically beat up on his foes while readying himself to cast a devastating spell, and to get bonuses for doing it. Of course, any gamemaster who accepts that style of centering should be prepared to deal with a player who wants to take zen-flamethrower skill for centering and become a magician. (Watch out, street samurai, here I come!)

It is less problematic if a magician's Centering Skill also helps him to earn a living or to gain some fame, as in the case of a rocker/magician who uses his musical talents to center. In fact, some Sixth World bands probably contain just such members. Of course, the magician needs his instrument for centering, and that can be hard on stealth, especially if he likes to play it with the amp running meltdown-hot.

Shamans traditionally use performing arts like dancing, singing, or playing an instrument. Mages are usually more comfortable with less emotionally charged skills such as chanting or the use of mystical languages. Both traditions may employ some form of meditation skill to center. But don't get locked into stereotypes. A mage can dance up a storm (as it were) to center himself, and a shaman can roll out Latin or Hebrew tongue-twisters if that is what he chooses as a Centering Skill.

A magician is not limited to only one Centering Skill. He can study many, but receives the benefit of using only one at a time. For example, a magician might study singing and dancing as Centering Skills. He can even sing and dance when casting a spell, but he would only use the Skill Rating for only one of them—usually the higher one—when making die rolls in the Centering Tests described below. Note, too, that a Centering Skill can never be chip-based. The Magician must know the skill personally and have learned it the hard way.

 Centering Tests

Centering Tests can be made anytime a character uses a Magic Skill. A magician can center when casting a spell, conjuring a spirit, enchanting a focus, and so on, but centering skills cannot be used in astral space. The magician must be able to use his Centering Skill. That is, he must be able to perform the skill freely and (if need be) loudly. A magician cannot use dance to center if he is tied up or has a broken leg. He cannot use singing or spoken words if he is gagged. Note that use of an appropriate Centering Skill can also count as fulfilling a geas. If a magician has the incantation geas, and tries to center by singing, chanting, or speaking his spells in an ancient language, he fulfills the geas at the same time that he centers.

The player makes the Centering Test before making any other tests to perform magic. A magician can also use centering to reduce Drain or to reduce penalties affecting his magic. Physical adepts are the exception in that they may apply their Centering Skill to non-magical tasks. The physical adept's Centering Test is always made against penalties (see below), but he or she can apply the bonuses made available by generating successes in the test against any Physical Skill (see p. 71, SRII) he attempts. If the initiated physical adept has also purchased the special Enhanced Centering ability now available to him (see Additional Powers, p. 34), he can apply the bonuses against tests in those skill areas as well. Magical Skills can only be used for mundane effects (not spellcasting), and centering has no effect on penalties favoring a Centering Test. Centering against penalties requires a Free Action to perform.

**Centering and Spellcasting**
When using centering to improve his spellcasting, the magician must be perceiving astrally (p. 145, SRII) at the time of the Centering Test. This is because centering requires a close watch on the energy patterns of a magician's spell in astral space. This means that the magician is vulnerable to attack from astral space while centering. If he is attacked, the combat occurs simultaneously with the Centering Test. The magician can make both his Centering and Astral Combat Tests using the natural target numbers. There is no extra penalty for distractions. Wounds received in astral combat do affect all tests, depending on the damage done, though subsequent Centering Tests may overcome the effects of the wounds.

To use centering, the magician declares the spell he is casting in the standard fashion (p. 129, SRII), then he declares that he will make a Centering Test. After making the test, be it successful or not, he casts the spell. The target number for the Centering Test is the same as that for the spell being thrown. Every 2 successes earned in the Centering Test count as an additional success for the Spell Success Test, assuming the magician is able to generate at least 1 success in the actual test. If the Spell Success Test yields no successes, the character cannot use any of the successes generated in the Centering Test. Any modifiers that apply to the Spell Success Test also apply to the Centering Test.

**Centering vs. Drain**
Centering against Drain lets the magician make an attempt in advance of throwing a spell to reduce the Drain of using magic. The player rolls a number of dice equal to the Centering Skill against a target number equal to the Drain Target of the specific magic intended. Assuming the magician gets at least 1 success, every 2 successes from this test count as 1 success in the actual Drain Resistance Test that is made later. If the Drain Resistance Test generates no successes, the player may not use any successes from the Centering Test. Any modifiers that apply to the spell's normal Drain target number for the actual Drain Resistance Test also apply to the Centering Test made to reduce Drain.

As stated above, a physical adept can make a Centering Test to reduce the target number modifiers against any Physical Skill Test he or she might attempt. This is done in the same manner as above. Only physical adepts with the ability Enhanced Centering can use Centering Skill against penalties for anything other than Physical Skills (such as Build/Repair, Combat, Knowledge, Language, Magical, Social, Special, Technical, or Vehicle Skills). Magical Skills can only be used for mundane effects (not spellcasting), and centering has no effect on penalties favoring a Centering Test. Centering against penalties requires a Free Action to perform.

 Quickening

Quickening is metamagic that can make any sustained spell permanent, without need for a spell lock!  The spell is given a permanent "circuit" into astral space that keeps it running until the spell is broken, either by astral combat or by an initiate using dispelling ability, described below.

To quicken a spell, the magician must sustain the spell for a certain period and he or she must pay Karma. In addition, the magician must use astral perception to "keep the spell in sight" the whole time he is sustaining it. Because he is feeding Karma directly to the spell, he must carefully monitor the astral energies that compose the spell's structure. The magician must declare that he will try to quicken the spell at the time of casting. After the spell is cast, the magician must make two Drain Resistance Tests whether or not he has made the spell permanent. The first test comes, as always, when he casts the spell. He makes the second test when the spell becomes permanent (at the end of the sustainment period) or any time he decides to break off trying to make it permanent.

The base time to sustain the spell is a number of actions equal to the total number of dice used in the Spell Success Test. This includes dice from Totem Advantages, elemental aid, foci, the Magic Pool, or any other bonus. To determine how long the spell must be sustained, make a Sorcery Skill Test and add a number of dice equal to the magician's initiate grade. The player may allocate no other dice to this test from any source (except the Karma Pool, see p. 191, SRII). The target number for the test is the same as that for casting the spell. Calculating the target number for some area-effect spells can be difficult because the target number varies according to the Attributes of the targets. In such cases, the spell must be focused on a central target and that subject's target number used.

To determine how many actions the magician must spend to sustain the spell, divide the base time by the number of successes. The minimum time is one action (10 Combat Phases or the character's first action in the next Combat Turn) after the spell was cast. If the magician fails to achieve any successes, he or she must sustain it for twice the base time. The magician can decide to drop the quickening attempt if the time required seems too long, but he must still make the second Drain Resistance Test even though no longer wishing to make the spell permanent.

At the end of the last action required to sustain the spell, the magician pays Karma equal to the spell's actual Force Rating (not the total number of dice rolled). The Karma must be spent from the character's reserve of Good Karma (see p. 190, SRII). The spell is now self-sustaining. If the magician wishes to make the spell tougher to defeat in astral combat or through dispelling, he can choose to pay more Karma than the actual Force of the spell. The maximum amount of Karma that can be spent to quicken a spell is equal to twice the spell's actual Force Rating.

In the action when the spell becomes permanent, that is, when the magician pays the Karma, he must make a second Drain Resistance Test. If the magician made a Centering Test against Drain when first casting the spell, any successes from that test also reduce the Drain for this second test. A new Centering Test is not allowed! 

 Dispelling

The only way non-initiate magicians can break a spell, whether sustained or quickened, is by engaging the spell in astral combat, which can be dangerous. Dispelling allows an initiate to break a spell with, one hopes, less risk. The magician must assense the spell to try and dispel it. He can only break a spell that has a Force Rating less than or equal to his initiate grade, however. (Note this refers to the spell's actual Force Rating, not the Karma spent to quicken it) . Lastly, dispelling is an exclusive process: the magician cannot simultaneously maintain a spell, provide spell defense, and so on while he is attempting to dispel.

If these conditions are met, he can try the dispelling operation. He makes a Sorcery Success Test against a target number equal either to the Karma spent to quicken the spell or to the spell's actual Force Rating (if it has not been quickened), whichever is greater. He may add dice from his Magic Pool or Karma Pool if desired. If the test succeeds, the spell's actual Force Rating is reduced by 1 for every 2 successes in the test. Once the spell's Force Rating is reduced to 0 it is broken.

Whether or not the test succeeds, the dispelling magician must now make a Drain Resistance Test, as though he had just cast the spell himself. Use the spell's actual Force Rating to calculate the Drain Resistance target number, per the normal rules. If the Spell Force Rating is greater than the magician's Magic Attribute, the character will suffer Physical damage. Otherwise, it is normal Stun damage. The magician may attempt centering to try to reduce the Drain for dispelling.

Dispelling cannot "cancel" a permanent spell effect such as magical healing. Nor does it have any effect on spirits or foci. However, it can break spells held by a spell lock, spells being sustained by a magician, quickened spells that have been made permanent, or anchored spells (see below).

 Shielding

Shielding is the initiated version of spell defense (p. 132, SRII). It works exactly the same way, with two extra advantages. Shielding increases the number of dice a protected character rolls to resist a spell, and it also enhances his resisting Attribute, thus increasing the target number the attacking magician needs to succeed. A magician may not use shielding and standard spell defense simultaneously.

Say, for example, that a magician allocates 4 dice from his Magic Pool to shielding, then uses those dice to protect someone with Body 4 from a physical spell. Not only does the character being shielded roll 8 dice to resist the spell, but the attacking magician's Target Number would be 8, instead of 4.

Shielding dice, once allocated, also last until either the magician's next action or until ten Combat Phases pass for the magician from the time he allocates the dice. In addition, the initiate gains an additional number of Shielding dice (beyond those available from his Magic Pool) equal to his Initiate Grade Rating. These Shielding dice refresh at the same time as the Magic Pool and can only be used for shielding.

 Masking

Masking hides the true nature of the magician's aura, allowing him to appear as a mundane when assensed. Initiates, however, may be able to penetrate this disguise. Initiates may also be able to penetrate the aura masks of other creatures able to hide their true nature on the etheric plane, such as certain free spirits. When an initiate assenses a masked aura, the gamemaster should make a secret test. The exact test conditions will vary, depending on the true nature of the thing being assensed. The basic format follows that of a Magic Success Test, with a target number equal to the Magic Attribute, Force Rating, or Essence of the target, as appropriate. A number of successes equal to the target's initiate grade minus the viewer's grade is needed to succeed. If the target's grade is less than or equal to the viewer's, then it only requires 1 success to see through the masking.

For example, a Grade 2 initiate with Magic Attribute 7 is assensing the aura of a Grade 4 initiate with Magic 6. The viewer rolls 7 dice against a Target Number 6, and needs 2 successes (target Grade 4 - viewer Grade 2 = 2) to determine that the subject's aura is masked. If the magician succeeds at the test and the subject is a human initiate, the gamemaster informs the first magician that he sees a true aura within a disguised one. The results of success may differ for other creatures possessing the inherent power of aura masking (see Powers of Free Spirits, p. 79). For ease of play, gamemasters may wish to use the following guidelines. Assume that an initiate's aura is always masked unless he deliberately shows his "true colors ." Assume that an initiate must deliberately try to assense a masked aura if he is studying a crowd. If only two initiates are present, the gamemaster can make a secret roll to see if they "notice" one another.

An astrally perceiving or projecting initiate cannot mask his aura completely. An astral body that looks like a mundane with no meat body attached is pretty odd. Not unheard of, but odd. The initiate can, however, choose to make his astral body look like a normal magician's instead of an initiate's. If the test fails, the magician character may try only once more. The initiate declares that he will assense the aura again. If this test also fails, the magician simply cannot pierce the masking. The only way he can perceive the truth is if the subject drops the masking or if some other initiate discovers the truth and points it out to him. This second attempt is subject to the standard +2 penalty for making additional attempts.

There is no discernible difference between a masked aura and the aura of a mundane, unless the Masking Test is successful. That means the gamemaster must be careful how he phrases answers to players' questions. "Looks normal" is always a safe reply, whether the subject of the assensing is a mundane or a masked initiate.

 Deliberate Masking

The above assumes the initiate is making no extraordinary attempts to mask his aura. If he is making a deliberate attempt, allow him to roll a number of dice equal to twice his initiate grade against a target number equal to his Magic Attribute. He may add only dice from his Karma Pool if he chooses. Every 2 successes from this test counter 1 success a viewer may generate to penetrate the mask. If, for example, the masking initiate rolls 4 successes, a viewing initiate must roll at least 3 successes to penetrate the mask. Deliberate masking is an exclusive activity, which means the magician can neither sustain nor cast spells while the masking is maintained. The magician can drop the effect of the deliberate masking at any time, or during a Combat Turn by expending a Free Action. Deliberate masking requires a Simple Action.

 Masking Foci

The masking described above covers the magician himself and a number of Rating Points of foci up to his current grade. That is, a magician with a Grade Rating 4 could easily mask up to 4 Rating Points of spell locks, power foci, weapon foci, and so on without worry. Beyond that, however, the presence of the foci would be evident on the astral plane. To hide foci beyond that, the initiate must make a deliberate masking attempt, as described above. Now, however, the target number increases by the number of foci Rating Points on the character beyond his initiate grade. Thus, if the character was packing 7 Rating Points' worth of foci, and only had a Grade 4, the target number would increase by +3. If the test is successful, the initiate's foci are masked along with his aura, and the successes from the test offset a viewing magician's ability to penetrate the mask, as above. All other rules and restrictions for masking and deliberate masking apply.

 Anchoring

Anchoring allows a spell to be cast and attached to a specific place or object, but not activated at the time of casting. The spell only activates when certain circumstances or requirements are fulfilled. These circumstances and requirements are defined by links, which are a new spell-structure component. Links are not designed into a spell as part of the spell-design process, though they use the same kind of Drain Target and Drain Level modifiers as spell design modifiers. These modifiers apply at the time the spell is cast and anchored. Links also allow certain types of spells to be connected to other spells and act as triggers. For example, a detect person spell could be set up as the trigger for a flame bomb spell. When the detect arson spell detects a person, it activates the flame bomb. Boom.

 Preparing the Object

Objects or places to which spells will be anchored must first be prepared. This requires spending some Karma, making a successful Enchanting Test, and the passage of a little time. The magician must spend a number of Karma Points equal to the total number of Force Rating Points of the spell to be anchored, plus the number of links (see below) in use. Once an Item or place has been prepared, it may be used over and over again without additional Karma cost. If the magician wishes to later anchor another spell whose total Force Rating plus number of links is higher than the number of Karma Points spent, he must spend additional Karma equal to the difference. If the item is destroyed, the Karma is lost and the magician must start over. The magician doing the anchoring must pay the Karma, or he may get someone else to pay the Karma (in the manner of first bonding costs for foci, First Bonding, p. 26), presumably the final user. In either case, the prepared item or place is linked to the magician and may be used as a material link for astral tracking, ritual sorcery, and so on. This link to the magician can prove dangerous with some anchored spells, especially combat or manipulation spells of Instant duration. (See Anchored Spells and Astral Space, p. 50) .

If any other magician wishes to use a prepared item or place, he or she must also spend Karma (or have another pay up) to prepare it for their use. The anchoring magician makes an Enchanting Test against a target number equal to one-half the total Force Rating Points of the spell to be anchored, plus the number of links to be used. Regardless of whether or not the test is successful, the item or place is prepared. Successes in the Enchanting Test serve only to reduce the base time to prepare the item, which equals one minute per Force Rating Points and links in use. Divide any successes from the Enchanting Test into the base time to determine the actual time required to prepare the object.

 Anchoring in Place

Once the item or place has been prepared, the spells must then be anchored in place. If multiple spells are being anchored (such as a detection spell as the trigger, and then another spell to be triggered), they can be cast in any order, but the applicable links must be applied to each spell. Specifically, spell links (see Spell Link, p. 49) must be added to each spell.

When anchoring a spell to an object or material, the target number for the casting is taken from the Object Resistance Table, p. 130, SRII. As objects are usually made from fairly specific materials, the following list of those materials may be helpful. Construction modifiers appear following the Materials Table.

**Materials Table**

| Category | Target Number |
|---|---|
| Natural wood or stone | 3 |
| Treated, hardened wood | 4 |
| Natural or basic metals (silver, gold, etc.) | 5 |
| Refined metals (steel, steel alloys, etc.) | 6 |
| Highly refined metals or composites | 8 |

Objects coated with Dikote™ or other similar technological coating are automatically considered to be Highly Processed (Target Number 10). See p. 91, Shadowtech. All the spells to be anchored must be cast against this target number, regardless of their nature or normal target number. A single success is all that is needed to anchor the spell(s). The spells must be cast in immediate succession, each taking the normal amount of time required plus one Complex Action per link. Because the linking of multiple spells is, technically, part of the same casting, the character's Magic Pool does not refresh between castings. He may access his Magic Pool only once for the entire anchoring process.

The magician must make a Drain Resistance Test for each spell being anchored, with the spell's Drain Code modified by the presence of links (see following). The Drain Resistance Test is made against the new, adjusted Drain Code. If by some chance the Drain knocks the magician unconscious, the spell anchoring fails, but with no untoward results.

At the time the spells are anchored, spells may be set in any appropriate state the magician wishes. In the aforementioned detect person-flame bomb combination, for example, the detection spell is left active at the time of the anchoring while the flame bomb is set to await its trigger.

 Enchanting for Additional Effect

An object or material that is to have a spell anchored to it can be enchanted to make it a better receptacle for the spell. Find the base target number from the Materials Table above, and then follow the Artificing procedure given In Enchanting, p. 23. It is not necessary to design a focus formula unless the object is intended to be a true focus. If that is the case, the magician must follow the full procedure for designing and constructing the focus. Enchanting an object solely for the application of an anchored spell is trivial in comparison to the construction of a focus.

The base time for enchanting an item only to anchor a, spell is 10 days, not the full 30 days required for enchanting foci. Apply the modifiers from the Enchantment Table (Enchanting Test, p. 25) if the appropriate conditions exist. The magician can use successes from this Enchanting Test to reduce the target number for the actual anchoring (spell casting): every 2 successes from the test reduces the target number by 1, down to a minimum Target Number 2. No Karma need be spent for this enchanting. Dice from the Karma Pool can be used to enhance this Enchanting Test.

 Anchoring a Link

Following are descriptions of the various links that can be attached to a spell, as well as the requirements for each link's use and its effect on the spell itself. Any Drain Target or Drain Level modifier is added to the normal Drain Target and Drain Level of the spell.

**Activation Link (+1 Drain Level)**
The activation link controls when an anchored spell activates. Something pre-defined at the time of the casting must occur in order for the spell to activate. That event can be the utterance of a word (or words), a physical action or gesture, or the trigger of a detection spell via a spell link (see below). If, and only if, the event occurs does the spell activate. If a detection spell is not involved, the triggering event must occur immediately proximate to the anchored spell. If the spell is anchored to an object, the triggerer must be holding the object. If the spell is anchored to a place, the triggerer must be at the very place where the spell is actually anchored. (For area-effect spells, that place is at the very center of the effect) . If the trigger is not there, the spell will not activate. If a spell link to a detection spell is involved, then the triggering event can occur anywhere within the area of effect of the detection spell. See Spell Link, p. 49.

Once the requirements for the activation link are fulfilled, the spell activates, subject to the presence of a delay link (see Delay Link, p. 49). The Drain Modifier of Touch Required (see Drain Modifiers, p. 122) applies to the activation link if no detection spell is spell-linked (see below) as the trigger. With the Touch Required trigger, a specific touch circumstance or pattern should be indicated. Alternately, a mental command could suffice (better for "friendly" magical items). If the user is a magician, no test is necessary. If the user is a mundane (no Magic Attribute), it requires a Willpower (4) Test to activate the link. Remember, this is in addition to the Touch Required modifier: the activator must be in contact with the item or place.

**Deactivation Link (+1 Drain Level)**
The deactivation link works exactly opposite to the activation link, turning a spell off instead of on. The requirements are the same. See Activation Link, above, for more information.

**Delay Link (Variable + Drain Level)**
The delay link controls how long a spell will delay activation once triggered. A zero-delay, instant activation anchored spell has no modifier and is simply assumed to take place. Longer delays involve additional Drain Target and Drain Level modifiers. Consult the table below.

**Delay Link Modifiers Table**

| Delay | Drain Target Modifier | Drain Level Modifier |
|---|---|---|
| Less than one Combat Turn (measured in Combat Phases) | +1 | +1 |
| 1-6 Combat Turns (5-30 sec) | +1 | +1 |
| 6-24 Combat Turns (15-120 sec) | +1 | +1 |
| 3-8 min / 28-30 min | +3 | +1 |
| 1-2 hrs | +4 | +1 |
| 2-7 hrs | +5 | +1 |
| 7-24 hrs | +6 | +1 |
| 1-4 days | +7 | +1 |
| 4-16 days | +8 | +1 |
| 16-64 days | +9 | +1 |
| 64-256 days | +10 | +1 |

For longer delays, extend the same progression. If using delay link when designing a spell, if the Drain Level modifier shifts the Drain Level beyond (D)eadly, add +2 to the Drain Target for each level beyond (D)eadly.

**Spell Link (+1 Drain Level)**
A spell link allows one spell (a detection spell) to trigger another (the anchored spell). The spell link simply connects the two spells together. An activation link is needed to actually trigger the anchored spell. The triggering spell can only be a detection spell, and must either be continuously sustained by the caster or else have a temporal link (see below) to relieve the magician of that burden. The detection spell will trigger the anchored spell once it has detected what it was designed to detect (i.e., life form, object, individual, magic, and so on). Both the detection spell and the anchored spell require the spell link, but only the anchored spell need have the activation link. Note that it is possible to build an activation link into the detection spell in such a way that it is not always active.

**Temporal Link (Variable Drain Modifier)**
The temporal link allows a normally sustainable spell to continue to operate without the casting magician sustaining it. Find the duration that the spell remains active in the Delay Link Modifiers Table (see above) and apply the same Drain Target and Drain Level modifiers. At the end of the designated time, the detection spell drops and the entire anchored spell's structure unravels. The anchored spell can, however, be activated and deactivated (per the requirements of those links) without restriction, except that the total combined activation time cannot exceed the time specified by the temporal link. Anchored spells that do not have a temporal link are automatically sustained by the caster when activated and remain sustained for the duration of the activation. Instant-duration spells cannot use the temporal link. Once activated, they are expended.

 Effects of Anchored Spells

At the time the spell is activated, the magician makes an additional Force Test to determine the effect. Use a number of dice equal to the spell's Force Rating plus any Magic Pool dice that may have been allocated to its anchoring. Every time the spell activates, it is necessary to make another Force Test against the appropriate standard target numbers to determine its effect. It is important to note that anchored spells can never be "aimed" or targeted. When activated they either affect a target at ground zero or else those within its area of effect.

**Sustained Manipulations**
Everyone's going to be anchoring sustained damaging manipulation spells to objects such as weapons, so here are the rules for it. First, there is a limitation on the Damage Level of the anchored spell based on the material used to manufacture the object. For simplicity, the rules generalize on a material's vulnerability to elemental effects rather than attempting to specify what kinds of metal are more resistant to acid and so on. Consult the table below.

**Material Limitations Table**

| Material | Maximum Damage Level |
|---|---|
| Wood | M |
| Silver or other light metal | M |
| Hardened/Processed metal (steel, etc.) | S |
| Orichalcum present* | +1 Damage Level |
| Dikote-coated weapon** | L |

\*To qualify, the weapon must have at least its Reach + 1 (see p. 101, SRII) in units of orichalcum used during its construction. See Anchoring, above.
\*\*See p. 91, Shadowtech, for more information.

Anchoring a spell whose Damage Level is greater than the object can handle damages the object and makes it useless. Applying an anchored elemental-effect spell with a Damage Level greater than (L)ight to a Dikote-coated weapon breaks the Dikote™ bonding and eliminates the effectiveness of the coating. The weapon itself, however, is still usable. See p. 91, Shadowtech, for more information.

The manipulation spell must either be sustained by the caster or else include a temporal link as part of the anchored spell. When a manipulation spell with an elemental effect is applied to a weapon, the weapon's base Damage Level increases by one level for every Damage Level the spell possesses. A damaging manipulation spell with Damage Level of (L)ight would, for example, raise the weapon's Damage Level by 1. If the spell had a (M)oderate Damage Level, the weapon's Damage Level would be raised by +2, (S)erious raises it by +3, and (D)eadly raises it by +4. If the addition of the elemental effect Damage Levels raises the weapon's Damage Level above (D)eadly, the Power of the weapon is raised by +2 for every level above (D)eadly. Additionally, one-half (round down) the Force of the manipulation spell is added to the Power Rating of the weapon. Note that though one-half the Impact Armor Rating is used to resist most elemental effects, the full Impact Armor Rating is used when manipulation spells are anchored to weapons in this manner.

 Anchored Spells and Astral Space

The one serious drawback to anchoring spells occurs principally in connection with damaging spells (either combat or manipulation) of Instant duration. Like spell locks, anchored spells are vulnerable to attack from astral space (though not nearly so much). Their presence, and especially the presence of the links, bridges the physical world (the place or object the spell is anchored to) and the astral realm. Before activation, an anchored spell has an effective rating equal to one-half (round down) its Force Rating. If the spell is activated (such as with a detection spell used as a trigger), it has a rating equal to the full value of its Force. This rating is used for astral combat (see p. 147, SRII) or dispelling (see Dispelling, p. 45).

Anchored spells that are disrupted through astral combat activate at the moment of defeat. If the spell is normally sustained, this causes no problem because the energy vents harmlessly in a fraction of the time needed to produce the spell's effect. If, however, the spell was of Instant duration, such as a combat spell or damaging manipulation, there could be serious problems. The spell activates at ground zero, affecting immediately whatever is within its area of effect, depending on the kind of spell. If the spell is dispelled, there is no danger of a secondary effect such as described immediately above. Carrying around an anchored spell is a dangerous proposition.

Anchored spells also act as "mini-beacons" in astral space, having been known to attract spirits by their mere presence, a sort of "odor" spirits can "smell."

 Anchoring vs. Quickening

In some instances it is possible to use quickening rather than anchoring to attach a spell to a specific place or object. However, quickening does not offer the advantage of anchoring's use of links. Quickened spells are always active and will continue to work until broken, but can never be of Instant duration as can anchored spells.

 Using Anchoring

Working with spell anchoring in a game can be confusing, and gamemasters should become comfortable with the rules before allowing their players to add this concept to the game. One of the most common questions likely to occur has to do with timing. As an example, a corporate executive carries a detect bullet-anti-bullet barrier spell combination anchored to an item he's wearing. Some cold-hearted assassin takes a pot shot at him: does the anti-bullet barrier go up in time?  Because the activation of an anchored spell is considered to be instantaneous, technically the answer is yes. However, the criteria is met only if the radius of effect of the detection spell exceeds the radius of the (in this case) barrier spell, as shown in the diagram below:


As long as the radius of the detection spell is greater than the radius of the barrier spell, the barrier goes up in time to impede the bullet. If the spell radii were reversed, note that the bullet would already be inside the barrier by the time the detection spell noticed it. This reversed situation might be desirable if the detect person-flame bomb combination were left as a trap. If the radius of the flame bomb spell exceeds the radius of the detect person spell, the unlucky persons will be fully within the area of the spell's effect when it goes off.

There is a strong temptation among magicians to use the detect enemies spell as part of an anchored spell combination. Though this could be very effective in certain circumstances, it is prone to misfirings based on the momentary flashes of emotion experienced by the people within the spell's area of effect. ("Hey, you stepped on my foot, you unrepentant bast-" Boom) .

And again, because we knew you'd ask, it is possible, technically, to anchor spells to ranged weapons like arrows, knives, and even bullets. The timing on such a creation is so hypercritical, however, that gamemasters may simply want to disallow anchoring to ranged weapons altogether. Think about it ... a so-called "magic bullet" anchored to the ever-popular flame bomb would have to have a touch required-activation link tied to the detection spell because it's not likely the user would want the triggering detection spell always on, in case of accident. What that means is that the bullet's detection spell has to be activated, then the bullet loaded, then the weapon readied, and then fired. Now, what's the actual activation criteria? Is there simply a delay link involved so that it works kind of like a timed grenade?  (Better get it loaded and fired in time...) Or is there some other condition, such as a very low radius detect person spell so that it triggers when it hits somebody?  (But wait, that'll trigger it in the hands of the firer...) Anyway, you get the idea. Certainly it's possible to anchor spells to ranged weapons, but is it worth the worry and Karma? Your decision.

---

 Geasa

Celtic legends are full of references to something called a **geas**, or plural, **geasa**. (That's one geas, two geasa, O.K.?) The word means "bond" in old Gaelic. "ceases" is a mundane rube-word. A geas was traditionally a taboo, something that either had to be done or else scrupulously avoided. As with a lot of the old traditions, the Awakening has taught the reality behind geasa.

When a magician loses a point of his Magic Attribute, he loses some of his connection to the power. His self-image, the confidence that he must have to make magic, is damaged. So he makes up for it by inventing little rituals to help keep his head straight. If he skips the rituals, his magic starts to slide. The little rituals become bonds restricting his actions, and then they are known by the old name: geasa. A geas is a ritual the magician must carry out to use his magic or a limitation he accepts on using it.

 Getting a Geas

Whenever a magician loses 2 full points of his Magic Attribute, he must choose a geas. To use this rule, magicians must keep a separate tally of their total Magic Attribute losses during their lifetimes. When a magician loses that second (or fourth, or sixth) point, he picks a new geas. Until he does so, he cannot use magic at all: his power is frozen by the psychological trauma of his loss. Once he has decided on a geas, it will be difficult to ever get rid of it. Only when he becomes an initiate is it possible for a magician to attempt to shed a geas. (See Grades of Initiation, p. 38) .

 Way of the Burnout

Even if the gamemaster decides to adopt the geasa rule, magicians can choose not to follow it. The magician can reject his geasa. He can decide that he is not going to live up to his geasa anymore. But having chosen this option, there is no going back. He can never change his mind.

Once the magician makes this choice, his geasa drop away. He can ignore them without any penalty to his magic. But...
* He can never become an initiate (see Initiation, p. 38). If he is already an initiate, he loses his grades. He drops to Grade 0 and can never climb higher. If he is a member of a magical group, the group may expel him. Treat this as though the magician had broken a number of strictures equal to his lost initiate grades, as described in Magical Groups, p. 54.
* His Magic Attribute Rating goes down immediately to 6 minus his total lifetime losses to his Magic Attribute. If this makes him a mundane on the spot, so be it. The only time this really matters is if the magician was a high-grade initiate in the process of replacing lost Magic Points.

This is the path of the Burned-Out Mage Archetype (p. 3, Contacts and Archetypes, SRII Gamemaster Screen). No longer able to handle the demands of maintaining the magical lifestyle, he begins his slide to the bottom of the magical food chain, finally rejecting magic completely and becoming a mundane.

Again, a geas is a ritual the magician must carry out to use his magic or a limitation he accepts on using it. The geas has no power in itself; it is like a normal fetish that way. When a magician breaks a geas, he can still try to get the magic working, but only at a penalty of +2 to his target number for all magical tests (targeting, Drain resistance, defense, and so on). If he has broken more than one of his geasa, add +2 for every one broken. The one good thing about geasa is that the magician need not bother with them when using astral projection. That is, his tests for astral combat, assensing items, and other similar actions are not subject to the geasa rule. However, if he is making any non-astral magical test and just happens to be astrally active at the time, the non-astral tests take the penalty. As indicated in the section on magical groups, breaking a geas is not an infraction. The magician does not have to make up for breaking it. A geas is simply a condition the character puts on using his magic. If he uses magic without fulfilling that condition, he gets hit with a penalty for breaking the geas, but the effect is largely psychological. Once the character begins to fulfill the condition, the penalty vanishes.

 Standard Geasa

**Condition Geas**
With the condition geas, the magician specifies a personal condition to make magic. He must, for example, be using astral perception, or be unwounded, or sitting in lotus position, or drunk, or whatever. When he is not in this condition, the geas is broken.

**Domain Geas**
The magician specifies a domain or environment in which his magic works freely. Most urban magic types will choose the city, natch. In any other domain, the geas is broken.

**Fasting Geas**
If the magician eats or drinks anything, this geas is broken for the next 24 hours.

**Gesture Geas**
This geas requires the magician to gesture visibly and freely to make magic. If he is tied up, handcuffed, paralyzed, or otherwise not free to move his hands and arms, he breaks this geas. Note that it is assumed that the casting of even simple magic requires some activity on the mage's part (as indicated in Noticing Spellcasting, p. 132, SRII). This geas operates above and beyond that and is always recognizable as spellcasting.

**Incantation Geas**
The magician has to speak in a loud voice to make the magic happen. If he is gagged, has lost his voice, is silenced by a spell, or cannot otherwise speak clearly and audibly, he breaks this geas. Note that it is assumed that the casting of even simple magic requires some activity on the mage's part (as indicated in Noticing Spellcasting, p. 132, SRII). This geas operates above and beyond that and is always recognizable as spellcasting.

**Sacrifice Geas**
This geas applies ONLY to non-player characters. It requires a magician to kill a sentient being to use his magic. If he has not performed a sacrifice in the last 24 hours, this geas is broken. The killing must be with his bare hands or a personal weapon (knife, sword, spurs, club, and so on). That is, the magician must be in physical contact with the victim. Killing by spell or ranged weapon does not count. GAMEMASTER NOTE: This geas is only applicable to non-player character magicians. Player characters MAY NOT, under any circumstances, be under this geas. Many magical scholars believe that blood magic is incredibly dangerous and can only lead to grave, dark consequences.

**Shaman's Geas**
Only magic that earns a Totem Advantage fulfills this geas. Doing any other kind of magic breaks it. Only a fully capable shaman can take this geas. It is not available to shamanic adepts (see Shamanic Adepts, p. 124, SRII) or to non-shamans.

**Talisman Geas**
The magician must use a talisman, or personal fetish, to do magic. This can be anything, including a focus. If the magician is not holding or wearing the talisman, he breaks this geas. If the talisman is lost, taken away, or destroyed, the magician must retrieve it or get another very similar to the original. If the magician picks a nonmagical item as his talisman, he must replace it with the same kind of item. It is not enough to say "a crystal ." It must be at least as specific as "a quartz crystal set in a silver medallion, hung on a golden chain ." It is recommended that at least three distinct characteristics be specified about any non-magical talisman. If the magician chooses a focus as his talisman, he can replace it with any focus of the same type and rating. If he declares that his Rating 3 power focus is also his talisman, he must keep in mind that if anything happens to the focus, he's hosed until he gets and bonds another Rating 3 power focus. Note that if he permanently uses up Rating Points from a focus, it is no longer considered to be the same talisman, because its rating went down.

**Time Geas**
The magician specifies that his magic works freely only by day or by night. If he tries to use magic at another time, the geas is broken. The magician might also choose a single season of the year during which his magic may be used freely. The rest of the year, the geas is broken.

 Creating New Geasa

Some bright wiz-boy may decide he wants to make up his own geas. That's sub-zero by us, but here are the guidelines for how it should work.

The geas must be something that affects all the character's magic, not just sorcery. If it is some special action to perform, one performance lasts only 24 hours, as in fasting. It is recommended that such a geas involve some other person as well, rather than being an action the magician can go off and do all alone. Avoiding some act can be a geas, too, and the geas is broken for 24 hours after the character performs the act. The action to avoid must be something common, and it must also be something that is a true necessity of the character's life. If it is a condition that must (or must not) exist in order to do magic—the presence or absence of sunlight, moonlight, a season, a physical state, and so on—that condition must be consistent with the type of magic performed.

---

 Magical Groups

Orders, covens, lodges, temples, and circles are just some of the names magical groups may take. People tend to be social critters, even oddballs like magicians. A drinking society that caters to magicians and their shop talk is not necessarily a magical group, however. Neither is a trade association or even a school faculty or wage-mage research team. What makes a group magical is the same as for an individual magician: the members of a magical group have made the advancement of their art the major focus of the group. It is why they formed the group and why they stay together.

To be effective, to be an initiating group, a magical group must have developed an **astral contact**. This is a psychic link to the energy of astral space, the stuff that gives magic its juice. It gives the group its power the way a genetic link to astral space gives power to the magician. Members of an astral contact group qualify for the Karma discount on their initiations. (See Initiation, page 38) . Only an astral contact group is a true, magical group. Anything else is just a gathering of magicians. Forming such a group is described later in this section.

 Strictures

Groups usually have **strictures**. Similar to geasa (see Geasa, p. 52), strictures are group rules that are tied to the group's magic. If a member breaks a stricture, it may interfere with the group's astral contact unless they expel the guilty member. Setting up an astral contact takes time (and lots of Karma), so magical groups aren't much fond of people who mess with the rules.

Some strictures define what individual members must or cannot do. If a member violates such a stricture during the game, the gamemaster makes a note of it. When the offending member applies for his next initiation, this violation may be so serious that the group expels him. It does not matter whether or not someone witnesses the magician breaking a stricture. The act alone sets up "bad vibes" in his aura that are visible to fellow group members when he wants to take his next initiation with the group. The question is not whether he gets away with breaking the stricture, but whether the effect of the violation is grave enough to disrupt the group's astral contact. There is NO WAY for a magician petitioning for initiation to conceal that he has broken a stricture.

To determine whether the initiate's offense is considered serious, he must make a Magic Test. The target number is twice the initiate grade the magician is trying to attain and he must roll a number of successes greater than the number of strictures he has broken. If the magician passes the test, his lapses have not been severe enough to be dangerous. Wipe out the tally of broken rules; the initiation will give him a clean slate. If he fails the test, the group must either expel the offender or lose their astral contact. Many groups will not think twice about it, and out he goes. Other groups, however, will be inclined to examine whether the member "did the wrong thing for the right reason ." Some kind of hearing or trial is in order. Such a group may decide to let the erring member retain his status if he can accomplish some appropriate quest or deed. This is an opportunity for some good plot complications or new roleplaying ideas. If the group loses its astral contact, they must restore it before initiate members can benefit from group membership to reduce the Karma Cost of initiation. See Founding a Group, p. 58.

* **Belief**: All members must adhere to a specific moral or philosophical belief. Any activity that violates the belief breaks the stricture. Many variations are possible with this stricture, but it is probably best to limit them to the kinds of moral or religious beliefs that are familiar to the players. The gamemaster is the final judge of whether a specific belief is a stricture or not. Group strictures are ones that only the group, acting as a whole, can break. If the group makes an exception to one of its group strictures, it automatically loses its astral contact. It is entirely possible that a magical group will 
* **Exclusive Membership**: A member of the group may not be a member of any other magical group. If a member joins another group, that is, undergoes an initiation in that group, he breaks this stricture. This can get a little complicated. If a member of an exclusive group joins another exclusive group, he has committed a violation against both.
* **Exclusive Ritual**: Members of the group may not perform ritual magic with magicians who are not members of the group. Each time they do, it counts as a violation of the stricture.
* **Fraternity**: Members of the group are expected to do whatever possible to assist other members on request. Refusing to provide assistance that is within the member's ability is a violation.
* **Karma**: Members must spend much free time working on group-related matters. To represent this, reduce all Karma Awards to a member of this group by -1. A member can decide not to give up the Karma Point when he gets an award, but this counts as a violation of the Karma stricture.
* **Obedience**: The obedience stricture requires members to accept group commands and demands on non-magical matters. In other words, the group has a say in the private lives of its members. Most such groups have rank systems, with members expected to follow orders from those of higher rank. Rank is usually a function of initiate grade or at least the number of grades taken as an initiate of that group. Failure to obey a superior in the order violates this stricture.
* **Secrecy**: The group never admits its existence in public. Members never admit to membership. Rumors abound, of course, so magicians looking to join a group may find a connection to a secret group as easily as to any other magical group. A secret group may also decide to approach an individual and reveal its existence for some reason. Public exposure of the group is limited, however. If a member tells a non-member that he is part of the group, this breaks this stricture. It is also a violation for a character to tell a nonmember about the group even if 
* **Restricted Membership**: The group can only admit individuals of a particular gender, race, religion, and so on. Note that this counts as one stricture even if it includes several limitations. For example, a Dianic coven would be limited to women who practice wicca.
* **Link**: All members must give the group a material link (p. 135, SRII, and p. 35 of this book). This can be a small cell sample (a few drops of blood will do) or a thesis (see Initiation, p. 38). Some groups return this link to a member who leaves the group, while others keep the link as a threat of ritual sorcery against members who step out of line. It all depends on the philosophy of the group.
* **Oath**: All members must, in their first initiation with the group, accept the oath ordeal (see Ordeals, p. 39). If the initiate has never undergone this ordeal, it counts for the reduced Karma Cost on that initiation. If he has sworn an oath earlier, then this oath does not count as an ordeal, but still binds the initiate, as specified in the rules.

 Customs

Besides strictures, most magical groups have general rules and customs. Breaking too many of these can also get a member booted out of the group. Unlike violating a stricture, violating a custom is not magically visible. Breaking a stricture leaves traces in the offender's aura that are perceived when he comes up for his next initiation. It does not matter whether or not someone else actually observed him violating the stricture. Violating a custom, on the other hand, has no effect if done in private.

Customs can be sensible or dogmatic, bigoted or enlightened. Groups with a particular political, religious, or social agenda are likely to have customs relating to those agendas. A group of shamans with a Mother Earth religious bent are likely to have customs strongly supportive of conservation or they may even practice eco-terrorism. A group of magicians backed by a local chapter of the Humanis Policlub will probably have some nasty customs relating to metahumans. A group composed of top corporate wage mages will emphasize loyalty to the corp. Adherence to a group symbology might also be a custom. ("If ya wanna be in the fraggin' group, ya gotta wear the ears!")

Adding customs gives a group some color, and provides concrete details for roleplaying. Customs can also prevent a group from turning into a random set of numbers that players juggle just to get cheap initiations.

 Group Resources

Besides providing benefits for undergoing initiations, groups usually have other resources available to members. Resources are rated the same way as lifestyles (p. 189, SRII) and are supported by member dues. Members can always chip in to buy specific group resources, too. Even magicians sometimes have to pass the hat. If the group has a patron (see Patrons, following), the patron usually picks up the tab for the resources, which will make dues either low or non-existent. In return for a patron's support, group members usually owe the patron services in return, however.

Members usually pay their fair share of the cost of maintaining the resources, though at a kind of group discount. Dues are generally equal to the member's share of the cost of maintaining that lifestyle. Thus, if a group with ten members decides to maintain a High Resources Lifestyle, dues would be 10 percent of 10,000 nuyen per month, or 1,000 nuyen per month. Some groups might, alas, exploit their members, charging, say, Luxury Lifestyle dues but providing only Middle Lifestyle resources or less—the difference going into the leadership's pockets. Then again, a wealthy patron might provide luxury resources at no charge to members. At least, not in money.

The following describes the various levels of group resources possible, in descending order, from luxury to street level.

* **Luxury Resources**: The group has magnificent headquarters, possibly even a spacious estate, with a residence, a ritual building, herb gardens, and so on. It also has several other sites for magical use by members or else can provide living accommodations (at Middle level but with some perks such as vehicles). The group possesses superb library and lab facilities, equivalent to those of a major corporation or university, with no effective rating limit. Members can obtain ritual materials at a 50 percent discount.
* **High Resources**: The group has a major headquarters somewhere, and either has several lesser offices and temple space elsewhere or can provide living accommodations for members at a Middle Lifestyle level (but no car, entertainment budget, and so on). It has an excellent library and other facilities (2D6 + 6 rating) and provides ritual materials to members at a 25 percent discount.
* **Middle Resources**: The group has rented a nice space and possesses a decent set of working tools (1D6 + 6 rating for libraries and lodges). Ritual materials are available to group members at a 10 percent discount.
* **Low Resources**: The group owns or rents headquarters space and can afford some simple working tools. They have hermetic libraries for one or two skills or perhaps a permanent medicine lodge (roll 1D3 + 3 for rating), depending on the traditions of the members.
* **Squatter Resources**: The group at the squatter level probably has a cheap headquarters set up somewhere, probably in an abandoned area of the Barrens. At the very least this would provide a private place for ritual work. BYOG (Bring Your Own Gear). Not much else.
* **Street Resources**: A group at this level has no material resources at all. Dues are cheap, though. It costs nothing to have a share in nothing. Whenever the group needs to pay for something, members must chip in.

 Patrons

A patron may be either an individual(s) or organization(s) that provides material backing in return for the group's magical assistance. Some patrons are more demanding than others. Many corporations support magical groups among their top wage mages, and provide them with Luxury level resources. In return, the corp demands and gets the full-time services of the membership. Strictures and customs of such groups are based on loyalty to the all-powerful corp.

Most governments support one or more magical groups. In some cases, this is in return for the good that the magicians do for their people, as in the case of NAN-supported shamanic lodges. Rumors also exist of government-backed magical groups being involved in intelligence and other operations. It is reputed that the High Prince of Tír Tairngire supports a group composed solely of physical adepts trained as assassins. Tír Tairngire's Paladins, the powerful secret police of the High Prince, are known to sponsor a magical group that provides magicians for covert operations. The UCAS government is rumored to support at least one group of mages who are all FBI agents. It's a safe bet that the CIA is not without its house magicians, either.

Several policlubs are reputed to maintain magical groups. Even clubs that oppose the use of magic may secretly do so, presumably on the theory of fighting fire with fire. It is safe to assume that a major corp or government can provide any level of resources it desires. A wealthy individual or lesser corp might have to watch the nuyen. An individual supporting a group has to pay the "guest" charge for the resource level he is providing: 10 percent of the regular price per member, per p. 189, SRII.

 Finding a Group

Like the old recipe for rabbit stew, first you gotta catch a rabbit. To join a group, the character must find one. Unless a magician comes into contact with a group while playing the game, he's gonna have to spend time following leads, visiting contacts, and doing other legwork to find a group. All he can do is hope that eventually one magical group will accept him as a member. Of course, these same rules apply when someone is looking for a magical group for other reasons.

It takes a base time of 60 days to find a magical group. The magician should make a Success Test using either Etiquette (Magical) Skill or Magical Theory Skill, whichever is higher. The Target Number is 12 minus the magician's Magic Attribute. Reduce the target number by 1 for every one of the magician's contacts who is also a magician, talismonger, or fixer who deals often with magicians. To find out how long it takes to locate a group, divide 60 days by the number of successes. If there are no successes, the character wastes 60 days. He might find a group that would not accept him as a member for all the nuyen in the Zurich-Orbital computer banks. The time needed to search can be broken up into shorter segments. Ideally, the gamemaster makes a secret roll to determine how long it will actually take the character to find a group. The magician might spend 10 days doing legwork, then go on a run, spend another 5 days, work on a spell, do another 10 days searching, and so on. A non-magician can try to find a group the same way. He needs the same skills, but has no Magic Attribute to reduce the target number.

The gamemaster, meanwhile, can either randomly roll up a group (see Building a Group, p. 58) or design one specifically to fit his game. It should be possible for the magician to join the group that he finds, so don't build a Dianic (i.e., women only) coven restricted to shamans if the searching character is a male mage. Give the poor spell-tosser a break by letting the magician find a group he likes and qualifies for. As the gamemaster develops more groups for his game world, there will be a wider menu of groups from which magicians can choose.

All this dice rolling and legwork assumes that a magician is looking for a group at random. If he knows the name of a group, or at least one member personally, he can probably find it just by asking around. At worst, cut the base time for the search down to 30 days if the character knows what he is looking for. And if he is a simpatico kind of guy, the group may even look him up and invite him to join.

 Joining a Group

To join a group costs the new member 3 Karma Points and the first month's dues, and so the character must have that much on hand. Another member or members can put up the Karma, however. The Karma represents time spent preparing for membership, learning group rituals, and other preliminaries. Another member can also lend or put up the dues money, particularly if the group is eager to have the character join.

If the character has the Karma and the cash, the group will test him to determine whether his "vibes" blend well enough with the group's existing structure not to disturb its astral contact. He makes a Success Test using his best score in a Magical Skill or his Magic Attribute, with a target number equal to the group's current membership. If the applicant is already an initiate, reduce the target number by his Initiate Grade Rating. One success and he's in. If the test fails, the group cannot accept the applicant just now. He can try again in 1D6 months, reducing the target number by half on the second application. If he fails the test again, the group simply cannot admit the magician.

 Founding a Group

It is possible that several player-character magicians may decide they do not want to join another group and follow somebody else's rules. Instead they want to declare themselves a group and, by the way, get initiated on the cheap. Nice try, chummers.

Remember that only an astral-contact group is a true magical group, and that does not come easy. Without astral contact, members do not get the benefit of group initiations. So, what does it take to found a real magical group? For starters, it takes two or more members, each paying the 3 Karma Points to join. Then, once a month, the group tests to establish an astral contact. To make the test they roll a number of dice equal to the number of members in the group. Members can "buy" another die for a test for 3 Karma Points. If the test fails, the extra die purchased does not carry over. Next month, an extra die will cost another 3 Karma Points. Members can pool their Karma to buy these dice.

The target number for the Astral Contact Test is 12, with the following modifiers:
* Group admits both shamans and mages: +2
* Per stricture the group adopts: -1
* Any member previously initiated in an astral-contact group: -2
* Per month of dedicated work by all members: -1

Dedicated work, as usual, means the members do nothing else all month except the assorted rituals and meditations needed to attempt to establish contact. No other training, healing, or shadowrunning.

Hostile groups are usually that way because the runners are interfering with some plan or interest of theirs or their patron. Such groups need not necessarily be "evil ." For example, a group of corporate mages would try to defend their employers' interests against the scum-bucket street slime who are ripping them off. Or the runners might be pawns in some nasty corp plot, up against a magical group opposing the real reason for the run (which, of course, the players don't even suspect).

If the gamemaster is creating a group for a player magician to join, the ideal situation is for both gamemaster and player to build the group together. The player can outline what he's looking for in a magical group, with the gamemaster reserving the right to add strictures, invent customs that might not be exactly to the player's liking, and so on. It is primarily a cooperative venture, but the gamemaster is free to add anything that might lead to interesting subplots or dramatic tension.

 Group Purpose

A group will have some reason for existing quite apart from its relationship to the player characters. Few, if any, magical groups come into being with the avowed purpose of "making life difficult for shadowrunners ." There are several general purposes that might motivate magical groups.

An **initiatory group** has the pursuit of magical knowledge and the development of the individual members as its primary purpose. Such a group may also have a social, political, or religious agenda, but its main reason for being is to promote the magical arts and to share the experiences and resources of members. Initiatory groups range from open organizations that welcome genuine seekers of knowledge to narrow-minded secret organizations that are contemptuous of outsiders and will tolerate no challenges to their model of reality. Magical knowledge and grade of initiation usually determine formal or informal ranking within the group.

A **dedicated group**, on the other hand, usually has a specific religious or moral bias, with its magic linked closely to its spiritual code. This type of group will tend to use magic to refine its pursuit of its special belief and to teach or demonstrate that belief to the rest of the world. Dedicated groups can range from organizations devoted to helping and protecting humanity with magic to fanatic organizations that want to use magic to force their views on others. Magical ability is usually the main factor in formal or informal rank within the group, but "correct" behavior can count for more than grade or skill.

A **conspiratorial group** is dedicated to a specific goal, usually involving power and wealth, ruthlessly using its magic and other resources to obtain it. For them, magic is a tool and a weapon. Such a group is usually secret and tends to seek control over its members, using strictures like oath, link, and obedience to get it. Skill and grade are minor considerations in ranking. Politics and dedication to "the cause" count most. Conspiratorial groups can range from zealous freedom fighters trying to save the masses from tyranny (whether "the masses" want salvation or not) to masked plotters who meet in secret as they conspire to enslave the world.

These three classes are, of course, gross oversimplifications. Some groups might combine all these qualities, but defining the basic nature of the group will be vital to deciding what strictures and customs make sense.

 Membership Size

Most groups have a dozen or so members. Many are smaller, and a few may be much larger. The gamemaster can arbitrarily choose the size or roll 2D6 and consult the Membership Table. Larger groups, with a hundred or more members, might exist, but there would be no more than two or three such groups on Earth. You can't get that many magicians to agree on much of anything, much less on magical practice.

**Membership Table**

| Die Roll | Number of Members |
|---|---|
| 2-3 | 2-4 (1D3 + 1) |
| 4-5 | 2-7 (1D6 + 1) |
| 6-8 | 8-13 (1D6 + 7) |
| 9-11 | 12-22 (2D6 + 10) |
| 12 | 10-60 (2D6 x 5) |

 Membership Limitations

Most groups tend to have the stricture of limited membership. Just as social groups tend to prefer like-minded members, magical groups value this trait even more. The most common restriction regards magical tradition, with most groups limited to either mages or shamans. Groups can mix traditions, but the psychological tensions that decision generates make it even more difficult to establish the astral contact. Be that as it may, the gamemaster arbitrarily decides on the limitations appropriate to the group being created or else rolls 2D6 and consults the Membership Restrictions Table. This table offers general ideas that the gamemaster may modify or use as a starting point for his own inventions.

**Membership Restrictions Table**

| Die Roll | Restrictions |
|---|---|
| 2 | No restrictions. |
| 3-4 | Biological limitation: a member must be of a specific gender or race. |
| 5-6 | Religious/moral limitation: A member must subscribe to a specific religion or moral code. This would include members of political activist groups. |
| 7-8 | Tradition: group is limited to a single tradition (hermetic or shamanic only). |
| 9-10 | Social limitation: Members must maintain a specific lifestyle, whether based on a specific culture, work for a given corp, and so on. |
| 11-12 | Two limitations: Roll 1D6 + 3 twice and consult table. |

 Membership Strictures

Having determined the group's basic purpose and fleshed it out with membership restrictions, several strictures will seem obvious. To randomly decide on strictures or to get an idea which strictures are typical for certain groups, see the Strictures Table, which shows a 1D6 chance that a given type of group will have a given stricture. For a completely random selection, roll 1D6 for each stricture to see if it applies to the group. The gamemaster may roll for strictures in the order he feels most appropriate for the group.

**Strictures Table**

| Stricture | Initiatory Group | Dedicated Group | Conspiratorial Group |
|---|---|---|---|
| Attendance | 1-2 | 1-4 | 1-3 |
| Belief | 1 | Always | 1-5 |
| Exclusive Membership | 1-2 | 1-5 | 1-4 |
| Exclusive Ritual | 1-3 | 1-5 | 1-5 |
| Fraternity | 1-4 | 1-4 | 1-5 |
| Karma | 1-5 | 1-4 | 1-4 |
| Link | 1 | 1-2 | 1-5 |
| Oath | 1-2 | 1-5 | Always |
| Obedience | 1 | 1-4 | 1-5 |
| Secrecy | 1-2 | 1-3 | 1-5 |

 Resources, Dues, and Patrons

Resources, dues, and patrons will be dictated by how a group fits into the campaign. If the gamemaster prefers to randomly select a group's resources, roll 2D6 and consult the Resources Table. To see if a group has a patron, roll 1D6 and consult the Chance of Patron column. Monthly dues will be equal to the cost of maintaining the appropriate lifestyle (see p. 189, SRII), divided by the number of members.

**Resources Table**

| Die Roll | Group Resources | Chance of Patron (Roll 1D6) |
|---|---|---|
| 2 | Street | None |
| 3-4 | Squatter | None |
| 5-6 | Low | 1 |
| 7-8 | Middle | 1 |
| 9-11 | High | 1-2 |
| 12 | Luxury | 1-4 |

 Pre-Generated Magical Groups

The following descriptions may be useful to gamemasters who would like to work with a pre-developed idea before generating magical groups of their own. The descriptions might also serve as examples of magical groups or for quick use in a pinch.

**Sisterhood of Ariadne**
The Sisterhood is a dedicated group, its membership limited to women who are wiccans. Wicca is another name, some say the true name, of the religion more commonly known as witchcraft. Despite the propaganda of various governments and churches through the centuries, witchcraft has NO connection to devil worship or evil magic. Wicca (as practiced by the Sisterhood, anyway) is a religion oriented toward the worship of the Earth, or Nature. The Sisterhood is also somewhat militant, believing that patriarchy (male rule of society) is responsible for most of the planet's ills. They believe that matriarchy, rule by women, is a more natural and harmonious state. This puts them in the "Dianic," or strongly matriarchal, subset of witches. In addition, the Sisterhood opposes ecological pollution and exploitation of the Earth, and will use magic to oppose it if gentler means fail.

* **Name**: Sisterhood of Ariadne
* **Type**: Dedicated (Religion: Wicca)
* **Members**: 13
* **Limitations**: Women only. Wiccans only.
* **Strictures**: Attendance: Monthly esbats (full moon rituals). Fraternity (in this case, read Sorority). Religious obligation: Wicca. Protect the Earth. Uphold rights of women. No harmful magic except to protect self or the Earth. Secrecy.
* **Resources/Dues**: Middle Level. Dues are presently about 450 nuyen per month. The coven has leased a small house in a more rural section of town, with enough privacy to do some ritual work outdoors. The group buys magical supplies in bulk for the membership. The house also has a decent library of hermetic books (Sorcery 8, Conjuring 4), and the coven owns a portable medicine lodge with Rating 5.
* **Customs**: Strongly feminist politics. Membership limited to 13, a tradition in wicca. Male visitors are absolutely forbidden at rituals. Many members are also active in promoting metahuman rights, and there are three orks, a troll, and an elf in the coven. Though open to both magical traditions, the group tends toward shamanism, and only two members are mages. The group is loosely affiliated with eco-activist policlubs, including those such as Greenwar, suspected of terrorist activities. Members often provide magical assistance on runs against corps attempting to pollute or exploit resources.

**Hermetic Order of the Auric Aurora**
Established in Seattle in the early 1990s, this group is devoted to magical research and the development of its members. Though dedicated to the scholarly study of magic, the Aurora Order also uses its resources to oppose the use of magic to oppress or harm. Rumor has it that mages from the Order helped the team of runners who broke up the "wiz-kid" gang trying to enforce a magical protection racket in a Redmond neighborhood at the fringe of the Barrens.

* **Name**: Hermetic Order of the Auric Aurora
* **Type**: Initiatory
* **Members**: 25
* **Limitations**: Mages only.
* **Strictures**: Fraternity. Karma. Oath. Secrecy.
* **Resources/Dues**: Middle Level. Dues currently 200 nuyen per month. Hermetic libraries in sorcery, conjuring, and enchanting, all at Rating 9. Enchanting shop on premises. The Order operates out of its leader's home, a sizable storefront near Pacific University. The basement serves as ritual space for the Order. The ground floor is a small lore store, known to the cognoscenti as a place to find excellent buys. Living quarters are upstairs. Members receive a 25 percent discount at the store.
* **Customs**: Personal freedom is highly valued. However, the Order prefers a quiet, scholarly approach to magic, and frowns on violent shadowrunning. Healing and magical assistance to the needy are the principal pursuits of the members, along with study and initiation. Though the Order has no formal stricture mandating an ethical code, the group maintains a high standard of ethics.

**Mitsuhama Research Unit 12**
Funded heavily by MCT and composed of wage mages loyal to the company, Research Unit 12 is a typical corporate group. It is part of MCT's internal security operation and serves as a "SWAT team" when magic is used against the corporation. Research Unit 12 also carries out spot checks of site security, using mental control and mind probe spells to "validate" employee attitudes, and maintaining astral observation on important and/or suspect members of R&D teams.

* **Name**: MCT Research Unit 12
* **Type**: Dedicated/Conspiratorial (protect and promote MCT interests)
* **Members**: 6
* **Limitations**: Mages only. MCT employees only.
* **Strictures**: Exclusive membership. Exclusive ritual. Link. Oath. Obedience (to corporate superiors as well as to superiors within Research Unit 12).
* **Resources/Dues**: Luxury Level. No dues.
* **Patron**: Mitsuhama Computer Technology.
* **Customs**: Members are expected to be loyal to MCT, though they cultivate a cynical attitude toward the more sentimental aspects of corp culture: group social activities, singing the company hymn, and so on. Success is the only measure of status. Failure is not acceptable. Unit 12 will use any means necessary to achieve a desired result. When members come up for initiation, they are expected to offer lavish "gifts" to their superiors. The going rate is cash or goods worth 1,000 nuyen times the superior's initiate grade.

**Bear Doctor Society**
The Bear Doctor Society is a typical tribal group of shamans, devoted to the healing magic at which the Bear totem excels. This particular group is located in the Salish, but similar organizations flourish all over NAN territory.

* **Name**: Bear Doctor Society
* **Type**: Initiatory
* **Members**: 8
* **Limitations**: Bear totem shamans only. Salish tribe members only.
* **Strictures**: Fraternity. Oath. Moral obligation (see Customs).
* **Resources/Dues**: High level. Members pay half normal dues ; community pays the balance. Current dues are 625 nuyen per month. The society maintains a Bear Medicine Lodge 8, as well as a 20-bed hospital with living quarters for members. This is in Salish territory, of course.
* **Patron**: Salish tribe.
* **Customs**: Most members are trained biotechs or otherwise skilled in the life sciences. The society keeps up with modern medical practice as well as magical and traditional tribal healing methods. Salish patients receive treatment free of charge, as do any patients who cannot pay. The society is devoted to protecting life and forbids needless killing. The requirements of the Bear totem are also viewed as moral obligations.

**Moonlight Thorns**
A group composed of physical adepts, the Moonlight Thorns are the private bodyguards of a high Tír Tairngire nobleman. They are also rumored to be his elite assassins.

* **Name**: Moonlight Thorns
* **Type**: Conspiratorial
* **Members**: 5
* **Limitations**: Elves only. Physical adepts only.
* **Strictures**: Exclusive membership. Link. Oath. Obedience (to lord as well as group superiors). Secrecy.
* **Resources/Dues**: Luxury level. No dues. Members are luxuriously housed in their patron's estate, where they maintain a well-stocked dojo and armory. The group maintains safe houses as needed on missions.
* **Patron**: Tír Tairngire nobleman.
* **Customs**: Members are fanatically loyal to their patron, and some have sacrificed their lives to save his. According to rumors about the Thorns as assassins, none will return alive from an unsuccessful mission: they either kill their target or die trying.

---

 Spirits

"Living in the material world would be a real drag if it weren't for people. You guys are just so darn funny!" 

---Interview with Artsnletters, Paranatural Proceedings, Vol. 4, Number 8 

"The philosophers don't know what to make of them. Some theologians turn faintly green when the subject pops up. But when magicians call, they come. They are spirits. Are they independent beings or merely a magician's will incarnated in the impressionable energies of astral space?  Are they sentient or do they reflect the intellect of the summoner?  Are they echoes of our psyches or the echoes of Something greater?" 

Spirits swim in the energies of magic like dolphins—or sharks—in the bosom of the ocean. Conjuring Skill unlocks the gates between the planes to admit spirits to the physical plane. The *Shadowrun, Second Edition* (SRII) basic rules presents information on elementals and nature spirits. This *Grimoire* introduces several other types of beings. It explains how magicians can summon **watchers**, simple servants and messengers who can carry out tasks in astral space. It reveals how to create **allies**, the powerful familiar spirits of legend, each one either a unique companion or a slave. And it describes **free spirits**, those beings who have become their own masters, pursuing their own mysterious ends in the Sixth World. Before examining these new forces, the *Grimoire* presents some rules expansions and clarifications needed to put spirits into better perspective.

 Spirit Forms

Nature spirits and elementals can appear in one of three forms: astral form, manifest form, and great form. Astral and manifest forms are explained on p. 142, SRII. The great form is explained below.

 Great Form

An initiate can conjure a spirit in its great form. To do this the initiate must successfully summon the spirit and survive the Drain of the summoning. He must then undergo an astral quest, as described in Initiation, p. 38. This quest takes no measurable time by physical-world clocks, no matter how long it may seem to the magician. The Quest Rating equals the spirit's Force.

A great spirit can exercise its powers over a far larger area and with greater effect than can a spirit in astral or manifest form. Like manifest spirits, great spirits are immune to firearm attacks, ranged weapons, and explosions.

* **Great Elementals**: Great elementals appear as large versions of their manifest form (p. 142, SRII). Great elementals can make an area attack with engulf power, affecting all targets within a radius equal to their Force Rating in meters. The spirit must be in the center of the affected area. It can choose not to attack friendly targets within the area. Great elementals can also produce showy and often dangerous special effects within their line of sight, each effect appropriate to the spirit's element. For example, a great fire elemental can ignite highly flammable materials. A great water elemental can burst water mains and sewer pipes, cause plumbing to flood, and direct masses of water like a fire hose. A great air elemental can generate fierce winds, causing characters in the affected area to move as though on difficult terrain. A great earth elemental can set up a series of minor earth tremors (.4 or .5 on the Richter scale), causing damage to fragile structures or items and creating difficult terrain conditions for all characters in the affected area.
* **Great Nature Spirits**: Unlike other spirits, great nature spirits can cross domain lines (p. 140, SRII, and p. 65 of this section). Additionally, only great form nature spirits can use the new storm power. Spirits of Man cannot have this power.

 Disruption

When a spirit is "killed" by banishing or by Physical damage in astral combat, only the most powerful magic can keep it from being destroyed. Some free spirits can actually survive this fate, as described in Free Spirits, p. 76.

If a spirit's form is destroyed by Stun damage in astral combat, a spell, or mundane weaponry, the spirit is **disrupted**. A disrupted spirit cannot appear on the etheric or physical planes in any form for 28 days minus its Force Rating. The timing suggests a lunar influence on their reappearance, but no rigorous theory has yet emerged to account for this. The minimum time in which a disrupted spirit can appear again is 24 hours. Bound elementals that are unavailable to a mage because they have been disrupted still count against the limit on the number of elementals he can bind at one time (equal to his Charisma). A mage who has bound his limit of elementals and whose entire "stable" of spirits has been disrupted would have to release one of the beings before he could conjure up reinforcements. Watchers are never merely disrupted. Knocking them out permanently destroys their fragile energies. The only way to bring a disrupted spirit back from exile before its time (28 days - Force Rating) is to make an astral quest to the spirit's native plane using a Quest Rating equal to the spirit's Force.

 Healing Spirits

If a spirit is wounded while performing a service, its wounds are healed the next time a mage calls upon it to perform a service. The magician who summoned a nature spirit or elemental can also "heal" it. It takes an action to do this, and uses up another service owed by that spirit. This action does not heal the disruption and loss of Essence caused by banishing (p. 143, SRII), which is not damage in the normal sense of the word. If healing the spirit uses up the last service that it owes, it will complete the service it is carrying out and then vanish. Each spirit also recovers 1 point (1 box) of damage on its Condition Monitor per minute it spends out of combat. After all, a few bullet holes can do little against something made from the fabric of the universe.

 Elementals

If a mage wishes to increase the number of services owed him by an elemental he has already bound, he can perform a new summoning ritual specifically to conjure that spirit to new obedience. Every 2 successes generated in the Conjuring Test adds one to the remaining services that the spirit owes, extending its bond to the magician.

If an elemental has lost Force Points, the magician can restore them by re-conjuring the spirit in the same way, using the spirit's original Force Rating as the target number for the Conjuring Test. Instead of adding services, every 2 successes rolled contributes 1 point to restoring the elemental's Force to its original rating. Any successes leftover from this process are lost. They do NOT increase the number of services the spirit owes the magician.

In both cases, the magician must resist Drain; if he passes out or dies, the spirit goes free at once. Also, per the Rule of One (p. 32, SRII), a Conjuring Test that scores all ones fails and frees the elemental. When bound elementals of opposing types engage in astral combat (fire versus water or air versus earth), players resolve the combat via a simple clash. The elemental with the lesser Force Rating is destroyed utterly. The higher-rated elemental loses Force Points equal to the destroyed elemental's Force Rating. Elementals of opposed elements and equal Force Ratings destroy one another. Free elementals are less vulnerable. They engage in normal astral combat with elementals of the opposing element, but each spirit is exposed to its vulnerability when struck (see Weaknesses of Awakened Beings, p. 220, SRII). Elementals have certain powers unique to them as spirits. For a complete description of elemental powers, see Powers of Free Spirits, p. 79.

 Nature Spirits

The different types of nature spirits are listed on p. 144, SRII. Some additional expansions and clarifications for nature spirits follow.

 Domains

Keep in mind that any given place lies in only one domain. One step away and another domain might hold sway. The gamemaster decides which domain a shaman occupies when he wants to cast a spell. A recent case in Seattle boiled down to whether the shaman was sitting in the front seat of the limousine (inside the bakery's plate glass window, and therefore in the domain of a hearth spirit) or the back seat (still over the sidewalk, thus in the domain of a city spirit). Great nature spirits can cross domain lines, but lesser forms cannot leave their domain nor can their powers extend into a different domain. The descriptions of manifest forms in the basic rules should make it clear that nature spirits take many different manifestations. Some tend toward more naturalistic forms: clouds, masses of earth or water, whirlwinds and dust devils, and so on. Others may assume the more humanoid forms that gave rise to legends of "little people" in cultures around the world. Spirits of Man are most likely to assume a human form, but that by no means implies they are all cute little munchkin types. Spirits of the deep wilderness, the storm, and the open sea are the least likely to assume human forms.

 Multiple Spirits in a Domain

Nature is a pool of infinite energy, which human magic cannot exhaust. If many shamans are in the same place and each wishes to raise a nature spirit, he can. However, no one shaman can raise more than one spirit at a time in one domain.

 Nature Spirit Powers

A manifest spirit can use a power against an individual or group target. Each use of a power generally uses up a service, though commanding a spirit to fight on behalf of its summoner only counts as one service, regardless of the number of foes involved. The search and storm powers of nature spirits are described below.

**Search**
To use a spirit's search power, the summoner must be able to envision the subject of the search clearly. Because of the astral connection between spirit and summoner, the spirit can then read the image from the summoner's mind. If a command is too vague, say, "locate every corporate security guard within two blocks," the spirit may not carry it out completely, if at all. The magician need not know all the guards by sight, but must give the spirit something specific: the look of a uniform or a "generic" image of heavily armed plainclothes corp goons. Nature spirits do not deal well with high tech. A hearth spirit sent to search an office building for a secret file can probably locate a printed file if the summoner knows the title (and if the spirit has enough interest in humans to handle such concepts), but will have trouble with electronic data. It might know how to log onto a workstation (after all, it is the spirit of an office building), but will not be any great shakes as a hacker. The spirit makes a standard Success Test using a number of dice equal to twice its Force Rating. The Target Number for finding a living thing is 4. For non-living objects, use the Object Resistance Table (p. 130, SRII). An expanded resolution system for the search power of a nature spirit follows. However, we recommend that the gamemaster choose between the basic or expanded system and use whichever is best for the story being played out. Within its own domain a spirit can search an area 1,000 square meters times its Force Rating. In order to search twice that area, a spirit adds +2 to the target number (as determined below). The spirit adds an additional +2 to the target number each time it wishes to double the area to be searched.

To determine the target number for a search:

1. Calculate the area to be covered. For purposes of scale, a city block is about 50 by 50 meters, or 2,500 square meters. Alternatively, say the spirit is to search a 40-story office building. The building is about a quarter-block across (about 400 square meters per floor), and so the area is 400 x 30 = 12,000 square meters.
    
2. Divide the area to be covered by 1,000. The resulting figure is the target number modifier. Divide the target number modifier by the spirit's Force Rating. Round up any fractions. Multiply the new result by 2. Add that sum to the base target number.
    

For example, a Force Rating 4 hearth spirit examining a 12,000 square-meter building in search of someone the summoner believes imprisoned there has a Base Target Number of 4 (searching for living person). The formula for the target number modifier is: 12,000 / 1,000 = 12. 12 / 4 = 3. 3 x 2 = 6. The final Target Number is 4 + 6, or 10. If the spirit scores no successes, it does not locate its quarry.

The base time in minutes for a search equals the area to be searched divided by the spirit's Force Rating x 5 (its normal speed in astral space). For great spirits, divide the area by the spirit's Force Rating x 10. After calculating the base time for the search, divide the result by the spirit's successes in the Search Test. The resulting number is the time it will actually take for the spirit to find its quarry. A spirit will spend the full base time searching if the search comes up empty. If the object of the search does not lie in the spirit's domain, a successful search will reveal that fact. An unsuccessful search means the spirit does not determine whether the quarry is present or not.

**Storm** Storm is a power available only to great nature spirits. Spirits of Man cannot wield this power. The spirit can cause a storm anywhere in its domain, from a tiny waterspout on a lake to a storm covering a vast area (but limited to an area of a radius equal to the spirit's Force Rating spirit x 100 meters). Storm spirits, by the way, can create a storm regardless of the domain on the ground.

A storm can do massive damage, depending on its type. Each time the magician calls on the spirit to create this kind of destruction, however, he must resist Drain as though conjuring the spirit. Each storm strike counts as a separate service. If an uncontrolled spirit uses the storm power, it must resist (Force Rating)D damage each time it throws a storm strike, because raising the storm severely drains its energies. The damage for a storm strike is (Force Rating)S. Armor offers no protection. This damage is effective against vehicles, but at half-Force and (M)oderate. Everyone and everything in the area of a storm is subject to damage from a storm strike, unless protected by the guard power of a spirit of equal or greater Force. This can be either the spirit causing the storm or another one. It need not be a great spirit. Note that a spirit of the domain in which the storm spirit's targets lie can guard those targets or oppose the attacking spirit's use of the storm power. For example, a mountain spirit may protect a character who comes under attack by a great storm spirit in the mountains.

Storms can be the kind with howling winds, lightning, rain, and twisters or they may exhibit other devastating phenomena proper to the domain such as tidal waves, earthquakes, avalanches, and flash floods.

 Allies

A magician conjures an **ally spirit** to obtain extra power or to create a servant or companion. An ally can provide him with valuable extra punch, both physically and magically. Magical tradition also calls allies "familiar spirits," from the Latin _famulus_, meaning a trusted family servant.

Each ally is unique, created according to a special formula using the rituals of Conjuring Skill. The magician gives life to the spirit by giving it 1 point of his own Magic Attribute. He also gives a individual Attributes and skills, paying Karma for these ratings. At first, allies have little personality and unquestioningly obey the commands of their creator. As they grow in power, allies can become more independent, perhaps even too strong for their creator to control. If an ally escapes from Its master's control, it becomes a **free spirit** (see Free Spirits, p. 76). Because its creator retains great power over it, a free spirit may devote itself to bringing about the death of its former master. Most magicians must struggle with the question of whether they should banish the ally while they can still control it, thus losing access to the spirit's abilities, or try to maintain control over an increasingly willful being. When a magician wants to create an ally, the player running the character designs its characteristics and the magician must spend time, power, and Karma—lots of it—to create it. Allies are created in a ritual of summoning, and may be modified later by a ritual of change, described below. Conjuring Skill includes knowledge of these rituals. Allies have no inherent appearance; all their characteristics are designed by the magician who creates them.

 Native Planes of Allies

The magician must specify a native plane for his ally. Shamans draw their allies from a shamanic metaplane and mages from a hermetic metaplane. The spirit receives no powers or abilities by virtue of its metaplane of origin, but a magician can destroy an ally by making the appropriate astral quest to that plane.

 Powers of Allies

Allies can have many powers, though some powers preclude others.

- **Inhabiting**: The ally can inhabit a physical body prepared for it by its summoner. This power differs from possession, which allows the spirit to try to inhabit any living body. Rather, the magician makes a suitable host body available to the spirit. Inhabiting actually limits the spirit in some ways, but makes it more powerful on the physical plane. As long as the physical body still lives, the ally cannot leave it. When inhabiting its body, the ally functions as a dual being and remains astrally active. The spirit cannot manifest because it is locked into the host body. The magician can provide an animal as well as a human host, using any normal critter for this purpose. Paranormal animals are too magically powerful to be used as hosts, as are sapient beings (such as people). The ally adds its Force Rating to all Physical Attributes of the host animal. Once inhabited, the animal body receives the additional powers of immunity to age and immunity to pathogens. More impressively, the magician can make or commission a unique focus (see Spirit Focus, p. 23) to create a **homunculus** as a host body. This is an enchanted item, a statue. It has "external" armor (both ballistic and impact) based on the material from which it is made (see Homunculus Table, following). The focus formula for a homunculus requires a copy of the formula used to create the ally (see Ally Formula, p. 70). If the host body is destroyed, the ally retreats to its native metaplane. The magician then has a choice. He can procure a new host body of the same type and perform a ritual of change to conjure the spirit back into the new body. This ritual costs no Karma Points. Alternatively, the magician can try to summon the spirit again, and thus permanently give up its inhabiting power. This course of action requires the magician to undertake an astral quest to the spirit's native metaplane using a Quest Rating equal to the ally's Force Rating. If the quest fails, the spirit goes free. If the spirit becomes free while inhabiting a host body, it must remain in that body. If the body is destroyed, the ally can only be "rescued" if a friendly magician performs a ritual of change or an astral quest. As the magician must know the ally's true name to accomplish either of these, the spirit must trust the magician completely.
    
    - **Homunculus Table** | Material | Armor | |---|---| | Clay* | 2 | | Wood** | 3 | | Bronze | 5 | | Iron | 8 | | Stone | 6 | | *Allergy (Water, Severe): Will soften and melt. Treat immersion as 4M damage per action. Treat high-pressure stream as from fire hose as 6S weapon. | | | **Allergy (Fire, Severe).** | |
        
- **Immunity to Normal Weapons**: When in manifest form, allies, like other spirits, have the power of immunity to normal weapons, as described on p. 219, SRII. Allies with inhabiting power do not have this immunity.
    
- **Manifestation**: Manifestation is described on p. 142, SRII. When creating an ally, the magician chooses a true form for it. He may also choose additional spirit forms. The ally may manifest in any of these forms, but its Attributes will stay at the ratings specified in its creation formula. See Designing the Ally, p. 69. Allies with inhabiting power cannot manifest because they are bound to their host body. An ally cannot appear in a great form.
    
- **Sense Link**: The magician may choose sense link power for his ally. If he does, the master is able to perceive with the spirit's senses, no matter how physically far apart the two may be. The magician's own senses shut down when he uses sense link. If the ally is manifesting or inhabits a host body, the magician may use the sense link power to view the physical plane. If the ally is in astral space, the magician assenses what the spirit sees without being astrally active. Astral attacks cannot reach a magician through the sense link power.
    
- **Sorcery**: With this power, an ally has Sorcery Skill, with a rating equal to its creator's Sorcery Skill Rating at the time of creation. As long as an ally is bound to a master, it cannot learn spells on its own. A free spirit, in contrast, can learn its own spells. An ally can only learn a spell when its master learns the spell specifically for the ally. Note that if a magician learns a spell for his ally, he does not learn it himself. The ally knows it, not the master. The master must learn it again if he wants to know the spell, too. Allies are subject to the normal rules for sorcery, including Drain. If allies suffer Stun damage from normal Drain, they are disrupted (see Disruption, p. 64). If the Drain Level causes Physical damage, allies disappear for good.
    
- **Telepathic Link**: The telepathic link power allows an ally to communicate telepathically with its master. Communication is limited to line of sight. If there is a background count on the astral plane when the ally vies to communicate with the magician, the spirit must generate at least 1 success in a Force Success Test against a target number equal to the background count. Make this test for each action during which the magician and the ally try to communicate. The spirit always makes the Force Test, no matter which of the pair tries to send thoughts.
    
- **Three-Dimensional Movement**: This power permits allies in manifest form or inhabiting a body to move in three dimensions, "walking on air" at their normal movement rate. Allies active only in astral space can, of course, do this anyway, in addition to moving at the blindingly fast rates of navel available to astral beings.
    

 Services of Allies

As a rule, allies are always astrally present in the company of their master. Allies inhabiting a physical body may not always be with their master. Of course, the ally cannot be in two places at once—if the magician sends it off to do a job for him, the ally cannot be with him at the same time. Ordering the spirit to perform a service takes an action, though the magician can tell the spirit to be ready to perform a specific service for him without using an action. As a spirit becomes more independent, it may perform some needed services without being told. A spirit that resents its treatment is unlikely to do this.

- **Astral Watch**: Performing this service, an ally will watch astral space for its master, attempting to contact him telepathically if anything significant occurs on the astral plane. The master can also order the spirit to guard a specific site and to attack astral intruders. If the ally must make a Perception Test, roll a number of dice equal to its Force Rating for the test.
    
- **Aid Power**: Performing the service of aid power, the ally acts as a power focus, adding its Force Rating to its master's Magic Attribute and to his Magic Pool.
    
- **Resist Drain**: When a magician casts a spell, he may decide to have the ally resist the Drain instead of doing it himself. When so commanded, the ally resists the normal Drain of spellcasting at the Spell Force Rating the magician used. The ally may use the magician's Magic Pool (if the ally has Sorcery Skill) to aid in resisting Drain. Alternatively, when the magician has tried and failed to resist Drain, he may permanently sacrifice his ally's Force to buy additional dice to use in the Drain Test. Each point of Force sacrificed buys an extra die that the magician can add to his test to resist Drain. Successes are cumulative. If the spirit's Force Rating is reduced to 0, the spirit is destroyed. If not destroyed, the spirit regenerates its Force at a rate of 1 point per hour. Force reduced under any other circumstances cannot be regenerated; regeneration only occurs under the above circumstance. If a character uses this option often, and the ally later becomes free, the magician had best watch out. This service is agonizing to the spirit, and it may decide to take revenge on its former master for the pain suffered. Hey, no one likes to have their own Essence burned off to save someone else's butt!
    
- **Other Services**: The magician may also send the ally off to perform physical services, do astral surveillance for ritual sorcery, engage in astral combat, and so on.
    

 Designing the Ally

Before the character can conjure the ally, the player must choose the ally's Attributes, skills, and Power Levels, determined by how much Karma the character can spend.

- **Appearance**: The magician may choose one manifest form for the ally free of charge. If the ally will have inhabiting power, this form is the same as its host body. Otherwise, the ally's true form and any of its additional forms can be anything at all, subject to gamemaster approval. The spirit can manifest physically in any of its forms, but its form will not affect its Attributes. The Attributes retain the ratings assigned by the ally's creator. An ally with a Body 5 Rating keeps that rating whether it appears as a gurgling infant or a two-meter tall white rabbit.
    
    - **Karma Cost**: True Form (i.e., First Form): 0 Karma Points, Additional Forms: 1 Karma Point each.
        
- **Attributes**: Like all spirits, an ally has a Force Rating. The magician gives up 1 Magic Rating Point to create the first point of Force for his ally. To raise the ally's Force to the next higher level costs 5 Karma Points times the current Force Rating. For example, raising the Force Rating from 1 to 2 costs 5 x 1, or 5 Karma Points. Raising it from 2 to 3 costs 5 x 2, or 10 Karma Points, and so on. Force may be increased either in the initial design of the spirit, or by a ritual of change after the magician has conjured the spirit. All Physical Attribute Ratings are equivalent to the ally's Force Rating at the time of its creation. Later increases in Force do not increase the other Attributes, however. The magician can increase an ally's Physical Attributes at any time, either when designing the spirit or in a later ritual of change. Each + 1 increase costs the ally's current Attribute Rating in Karma. For example, raising the Strength Attribute from 4 to 5 costs 4 Karma Points. Mental Attributes are equal to the magician's own at the time of the ally's creation. They may not be changed. If the magician's Mental Attributes change after the ally's creation, the spirit's ratings remain the same.
    
    - **Karma Cost**: Force: First point paid for by 1 Magic Point sacrificed by creator. Per +1 to Force: 5 Karma Points x current Force Rating. Physical Attributes: Initial Attributes equal to Force: 0 Karma Points. Per + 1 to an Attribute: Karma Points equal to current Attribute Rating. Mental Attributes: Initial Attributes equal to creator's: 0 Karma Points. Cannot be changed.
        
- **Skills**: As noted, an ally receives Sorcery Skill equal to its creator's at the time of conjuring. Other non-magical skills may also be purchased at that time at a cost of 1 Karma Point per Skill Rating Point. The spirit's master may later increase the spirit's skills up to a maximum equal to the creator's Skill Rating by paying Karma Points and performing a ritual of change. The magician can never increase the ally's Skill Rating beyond his own. The spirit may only have the same skills as its master. Increasing any Skill Rating by +1 costs Karma Points equal to the current rating in the skill. For example, raising an ally's Skill Rating from 3 to 4 costs 3 Karma Points, either at the time of initial design or in a later ritual of change.
    
    - **Karma Cost**: Skills: Initial skills equal to creator's: 1 Karma Point per Skill Rating Point. Per +1 to a skill: Karma Points equal to current Skill Rating.
        
- **Powers**: It costs nothing to give the powers of inhabiting, immunity to normal weapons, manifestation, sorcery, telepathic link, and three-dimensional movement to an ally. Designing an ally with sense-link power costs 5 Karma Points.
    
    - **Karma Cost**: Powers: Sense Link: 5 Karma Points. Other Powers: 0 Karma Points.
        

 Ally Formula

Before he can summon the ally, the magician must design the formula for the ritual. To do this, the player must make a Magical Theory Success Test against a target number equal to the complexity of the ally. Complexity equals the cost in Karma Points of designing the ally divided by 5. Round fractions up or down to the nearest whole number. The base time to design the formula equals the complexity of the ally times 2, measured in days. To determine the actual time it will take to design the ally, divide this number by the number of successes rolled in the Magical Theory Test. If the player generates no successes, the design will take twice the base time. An unsuccessful roll of all ones stumps the magician. Before he can try again, he must either reduce the complexity of the ally design, creating a less powerful ally, or increase his Magical Theory Skill.

A shaman must design the ritual in a medicine lodge with a rating at least equal to the formula's complexity. A mage must use a conjuring library, again with a rating equal to or greater than the complexity of the ally. Each formula is specific, and may only be used to conjure an ally with specific forms, Attributes, and so on. If a magician translates the formula from one tradition to another, the ally's native plane may change, but everything else remains the same. Once he has designed the formula, the magician may proceed to the ritual of summoning. This ritual requires a copy of the formula, for it is too complex to memorize.

Walks-with-Spirits will summon an ally costing 47 Karma Points. The complexity of this spirit is 47 / 5, or 9.4, which rounds to 9. Walks-with-Spirits has Magical Theory Skill 4, enabling him to roll 4 dice. He rolls only a single success. The base time for the design is 2 times the complexity: 2 x 9 = 18 days. Because Walks-with-Spirits rolled only 1 success, it takes him the entire base time to design the ally formula. After 18 days of dancing, chanting, violent exercise, and much resorting to the beer pot (remember, shamanic ritual can make a flat party look like study hall), he puts the finishing touches on a shield ornately beaded with shells and adorned with two feathers from a mountain eagle. Its complex spiral designs seem to throb with meaning, though it may only be the aftereffects of that last all-nighter he spent getting the energy patterns just right.

 Ritual of Summoning

The ritual of summoning requires the magician to make a Conjuring Test against a target number equal to the ally's Force Rating. A shaman must conduct the rite in a medicine lodge whose rating at least equals the ally's Force Rating. A mage must have access to a conjuring library with a similar rating. In addition, units of ritual materials equal to the spirit's Force are required. One unit costs 1,000 nuyen.

The base time for the ritual is a number of days equal to the spirit's Force Rating. Make the Conjuring Test and divide the base time by the number of successes rolled. If no successes are rolled, the ritual takes the full base time and then fails. Every day the ritual continues, the magician must check to see if the constant demands on his energy are taking a toll. Each day, the magician must resist (Force + cumulative days)L Stun damage. That is, each day it gets harder and harder to resist the fatigue. Make the usual Drain Resistance Tests for Conjuring (p. 139, SRII). The magician may use Centering (see Metamagic, p. 42) to combat Drain. If the ritual fails or is interrupted, he may repeat it at some later time, starting over from the beginning.

If the magician rolls 1 or more successes when making the Conjuring Test, the spirit appears at the end of the rite. The magician then pays the required Karma for the ally and 1 point of his Magic Attribute to bring the spirit into full empowerment. To determine whether or not the newly created ally is bound to its summoner, make the Drain Resistance Test. If Drain has not incapacitated the magician, he controls the spirit, binding it to him as his ally. If he is knocked out or killed by Drain, the spirit goes free. See Free Spirits, p. 76. Regardless of the ritual's outcome, the magician does not get his Magic Point back!

The spirit can only be freed if the ritual of change is being performed to increase the spirit's attributes, powers, and so on. An ally spirit, no matter how powerful, cannot go free if Drain overcomes the magician, the spirit may only attempt to gain its freedom in a ritual of change. If a ritual of change fails, meaning the player has rolled no successes, the ally will attempt to go free. Moreover, the magician must still resist Drain, and if it knocks him out, the spirit will again attempt to go free. If the ritual works, the magician must pay the Karma for the changes to the ally, and then resist Drain. As with a failed ritual, if he is incapacitated, the spirit can attempt to go free. An ally spirit need not provide services to help its master succeed or resist Drain in its own ritual of change. It can help if it wishes, but this is one time it may refuse a service to its master. Note that the spirit does not have to try to escape control. If the magician has treated the spirit well, learned spells for it, and otherwise been a good friend as well as a good master, the spirit may not want to go off on its own. Or, having become free, the spirit may choose to stay with its former master as a companion; a free spirit can perform services for anyone it chooses. Only if the spirit truly loves the magician would it sacrifice its Force to save him from Drain, however. How much a free spirit will sacrifice for its former master is a roleplaying decision. It cannot be determined by a die roll.

 Watchers

The double-domed docs at MITM have come up with a new way to use Conjuring Skill, and the word has now trickled down to magicians all over the world. These days, every magician in the Sixth World with Conjuring Skill knows how to summon a watcher. A watcher is a simple little spirit. Some say it is just a bit of the summoner's consciousness impressed onto the fabric of astral space. Whatever a watcher may be, a magician can conjure one and give it simple tasks to perform. Generally, the summoning ritual requires no special equipment and can be performed anywhere at any time.

To summon a watcher, the magician makes a Conjuring Test against a target number equal to the number of hours the magician wishes the spirit to serve him. Every 2 successes rolled give the watcher 1 point of Force. The summoner may choose to make the spirit of lesser Force than the number of successes, making Drain easier to withstand. Drain for summoning a watcher is always (Force x hours)L, and is always Stun damage, never Physical damage. As always, resisting conjuring Drain requires the magician to make a Charisma Success Test. The magician may use the metamagical power of Centering to reduce this Drain (see Metamagic, p. 42). At any one time a magician can maintain a number of watchers equal to his Charisma. Watchers do not count against the similar limit on the number of elementals a magician can bind at one time. If necessary, keep separate track of these two totals. The summoner can dissolve a watcher that he has conjured whenever he wishes, even before its time expires and whether or not the spirit is near him.

Watchers can be summoned for longer times either by expending Karma or using ritual materials, or any combination of the two. The summoner can conjure a watcher that lasts for days, either by paying Karma equal to its life span in days or expending the same number of units of ritual materials at a cost of 1,000 nuyen per unit. For example, a magician summoning a watcher for 5 days can pay 5 Karma Points, or use 5 units of ritual materials, or any combination of the two (say, 3 units and 2 Karma Points). Whether its life span is measured in days or hours, the watcher dissolves back into the boundless energy of astral space when its time runs out.

 Characteristics of Watchers

Watchers exist solely on the etheric plane in astral space. They can never leave the etheric plane, either to manifest physically in the material world or to ascend to a metaplane. Watchers can see and hear the physical plane, and can even manifest visibly and speak to physical beings. Like apparitions, however, they cannot touch material things or affect the physical plane directly.

A watcher's Attribute Ratings are all the same as its Force Rating. No matter how high the spirit's Mental Attributes, however, it tends to be a tad slow. Watchers are single-minded, even clever, about carrying out their assigned tasks, but everything else tends to go over their little astral heads. Their intelligence level might be compared to that of a well-trained, loyal but dense dog. Watchers are better at recognizing living things and magical energies than at complex navigation in astral space. Energy, not geography, is their strong suit. A watcher moves through astral space at a normal rate of 5 x its Force Rating, or a fast rate of Force Rating x 1,000 kph.

Watchers do not deal well with unforeseen difficulties. For example, if a watcher sent somewhere finds its path blocked by an astral barrier that it cannot crack, the poor thing will probably sit there, quivering, until its time runs out and it dissolves. Watchers can be banished normally and/or engaged in astral combat. Because a watcher is bound strictly to its summoner, another magician cannot take control of it.

 Watchers and Astral Tracking

A watcher can track down any person or place known to its summoner. It cannot find a non-living thing, even if the summoner knows the object well. It can, however, find an enchanted item or other magical object if the summoner has assensed the item's aura. The gamemaster makes a Force Success Test secretly for the watcher against a Target Number of 9 minus the summoner's Intelligence Rating. If the spirit is looking for an initiate, then increase the target number by the subject's grade, for a watcher cannot deal well with the complex patterns of metamagical energy. Do not apply this modifier if the initiate the watcher is looking for is its summoner.

The spirit uses its magical power to track down the mental image it got from its summoner through astral space. Divide the number of successes the spirit rolled in its Force Success Test into 120 minutes if the spirit is looking for a living being, 240 minutes for a magical item, and 360 minutes for a place. If the test is unsuccessful, the spirit will hunt around in confusion until its time runs out. If the target object enters a magical barrier at any time during the search, the watcher will lose the trail at that barrier. If a subject happens to project into a metaplane during this time, the watcher again loses the trail because the track has taken a direction the poor thing cannot follow. At this point, make a Force Success Test with a Target Number 4. If the watcher generates any successes, it will try to return to its master to report its failure. Otherwise, it wanders around astral space aimlessly until it dissolves. If it must, the watcher can track down its own summoner. The Target Number for this procedure is 6 minus the magician's Magic Rating. Divide the number of successes rolled against the target number into 120 minutes to determine how long it takes the watcher to pick up its master's trail.

 Tasks for Watchers

- **Astral Guard**: A watcher is assigned to guard a given area from astral intrusion. The watcher patrols the area at its normal movement rate (5 x Force Rating in meters per action). If it observes an unauthorized person on the astral plane in its area, it will hurry to inform some specified person. If this specified person is not within the guarded area, the watcher will track him down and inform him of the intruder. The summoning magician can also order the spirit to inform any person it finds in a specified location (a security office, for example) of the intrusion.
    
- **Attack Dog**: The watcher is assigned to guard a place in astral space. It will only react to intruders in astral space, and attacks them ferociously. The watcher can patrol an area measuring about 10,000 square meters (see Astral Patrolling, p. 92) and can be instructed to allow individuals to pass unchallenged. The maximum number of people it can recognize this way equals its Force Rating. The watcher will patrol the assigned area at its normal movement rate (5 x Force Rating in meters per action). Watchers have a Damage Code of (Force)M. To attack, use the Melee Combat Rules (p. 100, SRII).
    
- **Bug**: The watcher can be sent to some place or to follow some person known to the summoner. It will observe all that goes on for a specified length of time, then return to its boss and report. It can give clear reports on magical happenings or conversations between living persons. It gets vague about anything involving technology, comm calls, printed matter, or arithmetic. A magician can also order the spirit to observe the place or person until a specific event occurs. For example, a magician might say "Follow her until she picks up a leather attaché case, and watch where she takes it. Then come tell me." With this type of command, however, the spirit may get confused or run out of time before completing the task.
    
- **Courier**: The watcher will go to a specific place and/or to a specific person known to its summoner and deliver a spoken message. It can also display simple pictures, up to the complexity of a two-dimensional, non-moving photograph shown to it by its summoner. If required, the spirit will get a reply and return to its master with that answer. If the summoner cannot give exact directions on how to get from the place where he summoned the spirit to the delivery site or if he does not know the recipient's location, the spirit must track it down (see Watchers and Astral Tracking, p. 74). It then delivers the message and gets a reply (if needed). If the summoner has moved elsewhere in the intervening time, the watcher must track him down before it can deliver the answer.
    
- **Irritant**: The summoner can order the watcher to find a person and follow him or her around, loudly repeating some offensive slogan or insult, or even carrying on an argument. For this job, the watcher will manifest visibly and audibly upon the physical plane. For example, a magician annoyed with a Mr. Johnson might send a watcher to follow the fellow around and snipe at him. "You know, it's really an honor to meet the guy who spread that rumor about Mitsuhama just in time to louse up their acquisition of Garuda Aircraft. How much did the decker get for that run, anyway? I guess you showed those goons that they can't mess with Boeing, huh!" Alternatively, the watcher can be sent to a specific place and ordered to hang around, sounding off on its assigned theme. "Hey, there! Welcome to Hannibal's Grill. I hear the ratburgers are really tasty today. Hiya, welcome to Hannibal's Grill. Got your DocWagon card paid up?" And so on. A magician can use this little trick for anything from a practical joke to a protection racket to a declaration of war.
    

 Free Spirits

When a spirit escapes from its summoner's control (see p. 143, SRII), it may decide to hang out in the material world instead of vanishing back to its place of origin. Spirits who do so are called **free spirits**, and ever since the Awakening, a small but growing number have chosen to live on the physical plane. Some free spirits claim they have been around for hundreds, even thousands, of years before the Awakening. Allies, elementals, and nature spirits can all become free spirits. As far as anyone knows, watchers are not robust enough to survive as free spirits. From the gamemaster's point of view, a free spirit is a non-player character with free will, its own goals and tastes, and everything else that makes a character unique. Because so few are actually running around, however, no standard contact or Archetype exists for a free spirit.

 Born Free

In one sense, the moment when a spirit becomes free may be regarded as its "birth." Whenever a spirit becomes uncontrolled, the gamemaster may decide whether it becomes free or simply vanishes from the physical world. Most powerful spirits, those with a Force Rating higher than 6, become free. In addition, spirits that have a long history of association with mankind go free: elementals who have been bound for more than a few weeks, allies, and Spirits of Man. To decide this question randomly, roll 2D6 when a spirit becomes uncontrolled. If the die roll is less than or equal to the spirit's Force Rating, the spirit goes free. Otherwise it vanishes. If the spirit is one of those listed as likely to go free, add +2 to its Force Rating for this test.

 Motivations

No one knows why free spirits choose to stay in the material world. Perhaps all uncontrolled spirits become free, but only some of them stay here, while the rest go off to some other plane entirely. Free spirits seem to fall into several general categories. Though not hard and fast, these classifications provide convenient ways to describe particular spirit behaviors.

- **Tricksters**: Tricksters enjoy the increased abilities they have as free spirits, seeing the physical world as a big playground. They tend to interfere in human activities, often engineering complicated practical jokes for their own private hilarity. They can be ruthless, destroying someone's reputation, his career, even driving a victim to suicide in pursuit of what they call fun. Or they may adopt more or less humane attitudes, acting like spiritual Robin Hoods, using their powers to take down arrogant corps and other "stuffed shirts" of human society. Tricksters can be any kind of free spirit: elemental, nature spirit, or ally.
    
- **Shadows**: More menacing than tricksters, shadows enjoy causing human fear and suffering, and may enlist psychopathic humans to assist in their twisted ends. Some occultists and paranaturalists theorize that these spirits are in some way addicted to the psychic energy of humans (and other beings) in torment. Like trickster spirits, some shadows may set up complicated situations for no reason that the human mind can fathom. Others simply revel in bloodletting: violence and terrorism feed their "habit." Shadows are usually free elementals or allies.
    
- **Guardians**: Guardian spirits seem motivated to protect the living Earth from exploitation. They rarely have much use for humans, though guardians have been known to form alliances with nature-oriented tribal peoples to hold off resource-hungry corporations. Guardians have also occasionally enlisted shadowrunners to help derail corporate plans for invasion of an unspoiled environment. Guardians are almost invariably free nature spirits.
    
- **Animus/Anima**: Animus/anima spirits identify strongly with humanity, and often help people in trouble or danger. As their name suggests, these spirits tend to assume a specific gender. Even in astral space, their auras take on a human-like form, though they are still obviously spirits. Animus types assume male characteristics, and anima spirits assume female characteristics. Vague rumors abound that some of these spirits have become romantically involved with (meta)humans. Others wander about the Earth seeking to satisfy an intense curiosity about human behavior. Though any type of free spirit may become an animus or anima, those most likely to choose this life include elementals, allies, and some Spirits of Man.
    
- **Players**: Players make up the final type of free spirits. Like animus/anima spirits, players identify with humans, but their primary interest lies in the power, wealth, and pleasures of the material world. Players seem to be spirits with mortal vices, which may be as innocent as an appreciation of gourmet food and drink or as perverse as a taste for BTL chips or other human addictions. Players tend to form organizations to guarantee access to the resources they need; rumor has it that the head of at least one criminal organization is a player. Any free spirit can become a player.
    

 Free Spirits and Karma

Free spirits need Karma to grow in power, but they cannot get it on their own. They must receive it as a willing sacrifice from living, physical beings. Karma is, after all, akin to luck and the power of a living soul to influence its own destiny. Karma is also related to the experience of life, and such things are unique to an embodied soul. The spirit cannot take the Karma; it must be given. Sure, people tell tales of magicians with hot skills and not-so-hot ethics who've found a way to transfer Karma from unwilling victims to free spirits, but no evidence exists to prove these anything more than scare-stories.

When player characters must negotiate a deal with a free spirit, Karma is the usual payment. Of course, some free spirits have a taste for resources such as services, contacts, rare goods, unique enchantments, and even plain old nuyen. Some free spirits even have credstick accounts, managed by human agents. It all depends on the spirit's goals. Karma is not the only thing free spirits want, but they value it above all. Magicians can give Karma to free spirits more effectively than mundanes can. Also, full-blown magicians do it better than adepts.

- Fully capable magicians can give Karma to a free spirit at a ratio of 1:1, meaning that if the magician gives up a point of Karma, the spirit gets a point of Karma.
    
- Adepts of any kind can give Karma to a free spirit at a 2:1 ratio, meaning the spirit gets 1 point of Karma for every 2 points the adept gives up.
    
- Mundanes can give Karma to a free spirit at a ratio of 3:1. In other words, the spirit gets 1 point of Karma for every 3 points the character gives up.
    

A character with Conjuring Skill can try a simple ritual to improve this ratio, even if the character cannot use the skill for other purposes. Even a mundane can do this trick. The player makes a Conjuring Test against a target number equal to the spirit's Force Rating plus its Spirit Energy (see Spirit Energy, p. 79). If the test succeeds, improve the ratio by 1. For example, an adept successfully using Conjuring Skill can now give Karma to the spirit at 1:1, and a mundane gives Karma at 2:1. A magician who makes a successful Conjuring Test gets real lucky: for every Karma Point he gives up, the spirit gets 2 points of Karma.

Mundanes and adepts can only increase their own Karma transfer ratios using their Conjuring Skill under these circumstances, but fully capable magicians can use their Conjuring Skill on behalf of other characters. Add +2 to the target number of any Conjuring Test the magician makes in order to improve another character's ratio for giving Karma to free spirits. Note that if a magician performs the ritual to increase someone else's ratio, the Karma payoff ratio improves according to the giver's standard ratio, not the magician's. For example, if a magician tries to improve the ratio for a mundane, the mundane pays Karma to the spirit at 2:1 if the rite succeeds, not 1:2. The Conjuring Test can be made anytime a character makes a payment" to the spirit, but the character only gets one try. He makes a deal with a free spirit to "pay" it, say, 3 points of Karma. That means the spirit ends up with 3 Karma Points. At 3:1, a mundane character would have to pay 9 Karma Points to give the spirit 3 points. If the mundane makes a successful Conjuring Test, he pays the Karma at 2:1, or 4.5 Karma Points. Because SRII rounds down any fractions, he only loses 4 points of Karma. If he blows the test, though, he loses the full 9 points. Free spirits do not believe in revolving credit plans. They will not take payments a point at a time while a character tries to hold onto his Karma. With free spirits it's all or nothing, chummer.

Note also that non-player characters do not use up Karma. This means that any deal made between non-player characters and free spirits are completely at the gamemaster's discretion. Ideally, the gamemaster should decide what resolution best fits the story at hand. If needed, the gamemaster may make a rough accounting by sacrificing the non-player character's Threat Rating at a ratio of 1 Threat Rating Point to 2 Karma Points. The gamemaster should use this guideline only if absolutely necessary.

 True Names

Each free spirit gets a **true name** at the moment it becomes free. The true name of a spirit, however weird or ordinary it may sound to human ears, expresses a complex astral formula that defines the spirit's Essence. Theory states that the local conditions in astral space at the time and place when the spirit went free generate the true name. Maybe so. No one knows much about the free spirits who have been identified so far, and the spirits do not give their true names to researchers.

Anyone who knows the true name of a free spirit can try to enslave it using Conjuring Skill. The magical tradition of the magician does not matter. For example, a mage can try to capture a free nature spirit or a shaman an elemental. If he has Conjuring Skill, even a non-magician can try this stunt. And only someone who knows a free spirit's true name can kill or banish it. Whether a character engages in astral combat, combat on the spirit's native plane, or banishing, if he does not know a spirit's true name, he cannot destroy it. The most he can do is disrupt it for a time. Free spirits protect their true names. When a free spirit tells someone its "name," it uses a handle, just as shadowrunners do, and for some of the same reasons.

**Learning a True Name** A character can learn a free spirit's true name in several ways. The spirit can reveal it (fat chance). A character may find it written or recorded by someone who knew it. Unable to destroy such records itself, a free spirit would probably try to get a human agent to wipe out the information. However, the spirit would tend to be careful about this kind of project. If it hired a shadowrunner to destroy the information, the runner might end up learning its name, putting the spirit right back at square one. Finally, as happens in most cases, a magician can use his powers to learn a true name. The mage does so using the following two steps.

**Determining The Native Plane** First, the magician must determine the spirit's native plane. The magician may be able to deduce this logically. For example, it does not take a genius to guess that the gigantic thunderbird that rained all over the magician's open convertible may just be native to the Metaplane of the Skies. Lacking such subtle clues, the magician must assense the spirit, some place it has recently been, or some object it has frequently touched. The subtle traces of the spirit's energy usually wear off from a place or item within a few days, but a place or object with which the spirit had frequent long term contact may carry its "signature" permanently. If the magician assenses the spirit's personal aura, he immediately knows its native plane, but this will not work if the spirit has aura masking power (see p. 79). Only an initiate can overcome this power, which lets the spirit "hide" its true aura from any observers on the etheric plane. Of course, the spirit may notice that it is under astral observation. Any free spirit under observation makes a Perception Test against a target number equal to double the viewing magician's Magic Attribute. If the Perception Test succeeds, the spirit notices that the magician is trying to read its aura. If the magician is assensing a place or item in order to learn a spirit's native plane, the magician must spend 1D6 hours studying the subject to get the information he needs. If interrupted, he must start over from scratch. Typical subjects for this kind of study include:

- Some item the spirit has affected with its magic.
    
- Some person the spirit possessed.
    
- Some place where the spirit manifested physically.
    
- The spirit's personal domain (see Powers of Free Spirits, p. 79).
    

**Quest For The True Name** To learn a spirit's true name, the magician must make an astral quest to the spirit's native metaplane. The quest has a rating equal to the Spirit Energy of the magician's quarry (see Spirit Energy, p. 79). If he successfully completes this quest, the magician knows the spirit's true name. If he has sought the information on the wrong metaplane, he must complete the quest to discover his error. In other words, only when he "succeeds" at the quest will the powers-that-be of the metaplane inform him that he is barking up the wrong astral tree.

 Binding a Free Spirit

A player character who has Conjuring Skill can enslave a free spirit if the conjuror knows the spirit's true name. Any character with Conjuring Skill can try to pull this off, whether he can conjure other spirits or not. The powerful magic of a true name can provide the energy needed to summon its owner, even if a mundane performs the conjuring ritual. To perform this ritual, the character needs access to a conjuring library and must prepare a hermetic circle, both with a rating equal to the Force Rating of the free spirit. Shamans must perform the ritual in a medicine lodge with a rating equal to the Force Rating of the free spirit. Adepts and non-magicians usually use hermetic techniques. At the gamemaster's discretion, someone from a tribal culture might use shamanic techniques to bind a free spirit.

If the spirit knows of the magician's plan to control it, it will almost certainly try to keep the conjuror away from the resources he needs. The spirit would be wary of a magician who knows its true name, for that magician has the power to banish the spirit forever. A mundane or an adept takes a greater risk than a full-blown magician in attempting to learn a spirit's true name. Because neither mundanes nor adepts can banish a spirit, the spirit fears them less and may find them easier to harm.

The conjuring ritual takes only a few minutes because the power of the true name forces the spirit to appear. Indeed, the ritual will summon the spirit whether the conjuror succeeds at his Conjuring Test or not. The use of the spirit's true name compels it to appear. Once it appears, the Conjuring Test determines whether or not the summoner controls the spirit. The player makes a Conjuring Test against a target number equal to the spirit's Force Rating plus its Spirit Energy. Rolling a single success forces the spirit to submit to the summoner. If the summoner fails to roll any successes, the spirit can and usually will attack him immediately—unless the foolhardy summoner can negotiate a deal with the spirit on the spot. This option is NOT for magical dabblers with minimal Conjuring Skill, however. Having their freedom threatened makes free spirits extremely upset.

Because the summoner whose Conjuring Test is unsuccessful can never try to bind the spirit again, the spirit might not automatically try to slaughter the audacious clown. The spirit does remain in danger as long as the character knows its true name, however. The would-be summoner might just pass that information on to someone else. If the conjurer's test succeeds, the spirit cannot disobey his specific orders, nor can it directly attack or harm him. It must come when he calls, like a bound spirit, and it NEVER runs out of services. It must serve as a loyal slave until the magician either dies or lets it go. The spirit can work indirectly against its master, however, setting up plots or involving him in schemes likely to get him killed. Free spirits make valuable allies, but dangerous servants.

Once a magician lets a free spirit go, he can never bind it again. Of course, he still knows its true name, so he may try to banish it if necessary. He may sell the name or give it to someone in exchange for some service. Before turning the spirit loose, a smart magician will make the spirit swear an oath not to kill him or try to get him killed. The spirit must honor this oath to the letter. On the other hand, nothing stops it from looking for loopholes. All in all, it makes more sense to befriend a free spirit than to try to boss one. A magician's knowledge of a spirit's true name does not necessarily make the spirit and the magician deadly enemies. After all, many runners know lethal secrets about their teammates, yet continue to trust each other with their lives.

**Other Uses of True Names** Any magician who knows the free spirit's true name can try to banish it, as with any other spirit (p. 143, SRII). Similarly, two magicians who know the true name of a spirit may compete to control it, as described in the same section of the basic rules. If a free spirit becomes "uncontrolled" as a result of such a contest, neither magician can ever bind it again. If one of the magicians involved in the contest had already freed the spirit from his service and he ends up winning the contest, the spirit will be free of any bonds to either magician. A magician must be able to use Conjuring Skill to banish or control, but the magician's tradition does not matter. A shaman can try to control or banish a free elemental, for example. However, an adept who cannot use Conjuring Skill usually cannot try to banish or take over a free spirit.

If a character knows a spirit's true name, he may use Enchanting Skill to create a spirit focus effective against that spirit. Normal spirit foci are NOT effective to bind or banish free spirits. If, however, a character knows a spirit's true name, he can attempt to make various "unique" enchanted items to threaten or reward a free spirit (see True Names, p. 77).

 Spirit Energy

One of the things that make free spirits more powerful than other spirits is their ability to build up **Spirit Energy**. This energy augments each spirit's Force Rating in various ways to give it more power in the material world. Indeed, Spirit Energy is a measure of how much material power the spirit has accumulated. When used by a free spirit, all the normal powers of spirits (pp. 214-19, SRII) measured using Force have a rating equal to the power's Force Rating plus the being's Spirit Energy. For example, a free fire elemental having a Force of 4 and Spirit Energy of 3 would use its flame projection power as though it had a Force Rating 7, doing 7L damage. Physical manifestations of the spirit also benefit from this bonus. A free forest spirit, a Spirit of the Land, with a Force Rating 5 and Spirit Energy of 5 would have Attributes based on a total Force Rating of 10, not 5.

All free spirits get 1 point of Spirit Energy at the moment they become free and can build up more Spirit Energy using Karma. Raising Spirit Energy by 1 point costs the spirit Karma equal to the new Spirit Energy value. For example, a spirit with 1 point of Spirit Energy can raise it to 2 by spending 2 Karma Points. A spirit cannot have Spirit Energy exceeding its Force Rating. A free spirit can increase its Force Rating as well, but must sacrifice Spirit Energy to do so. Increasing its Force Rating by 1 point costs Spirit Energy equal to the being's current Force Rating. Therefore, to increase its actual Force, the spirit must build up its Spirit Energy to the level of its Force Rating, then wipe it out in order to add 1 to its Force Rating. The spirit could then start again to accumulate Spirit Energy.

Some special physical manifestations, described below, possess different Attributes and powers than those normally assumed by the spirit.

 Powers of Free Spirits

In addition to the normal powers for spirits of their class, free spirits gain special abilities in the physical world. A free spirit automatically receives 1D3 of these spirit powers at "birth," when it goes free. It may gain additional powers when it increases its Force Rating. To determine such a gain, roll 2D6. If the result is greater than or equal to the spirit's new Force Rating, it gains another power. It should be obvious that an upper limit exists here, a spiritual "law of diminishing returns." The more powerful the spirit becomes, the more fixed its manifestation and the more difficult it is to gain new powers. Free spirits that start at lower Force Ratings and grow gradually can have potentially more powers than those who are very strong when they go free.

- **Animal Form**: A free spirit can appear in the form of a non-magical animal (see Critter Statistics Table, p. 243, SRII). When in animal form, the spirit looks like a shapeshifter, appearing as a larger and stronger version of the beast. For purposes of play, add the spirit's Spirit Energy to the critter's normal Physical Attributes and use the spirit's Force Rating in place of the critter's Mental Attributes. The animal form also has the power of immunity to normal weapons (p. 218, SRII), with an Essence Rating equal to the spirit's Spirit Energy. While in this form, the spirit retains all its other powers and can speak if it wishes. Nature spirits usually appear in the form of an animal native to their domain. On the rare occasions when elementals appear as animals, they seem to use a single, large, powerful animal form. Killing the animal form disrupts the spirit.
    
- **Astral Gateway**: The spirit can use its astral gateway power to bring the planes into closer contact. The power can permit anyone, magician or nonmagician, to project into astral space, either on the etheric plane or the spirit's native metaplane. The traveler is in a trance, his physical body remaining on the material plane. As long as the spirit maintains watch over the body, the traveler does not suffer Essence loss. Should the spirit leave off guarding the magician's body, however, the gateway closes. A magician can try to find his way back to his body in the normal way, but non-magicians will die at once. Non-initiates on a metaplane also die instantly.
    
- **Aura Masking**: This power allows the spirit to mask its aura in two ways. It can match its aura to its present physical form (animal or human) or it can make its aura look like that of a summoned, or bound, spirit. The free spirit accomplishes this by raising its true aura to its native metaplane. This power has an effect similar to metamagical masking ability (see Masking, p. 46). Only an initiate can determine the true nature of a masked aura. In order to do this, the magician must make a Success Test against a target number equal to the spirit's Force Rating. In order to determine how many successes the magician needs to see through the masking, use the spirit's Spirit Energy as its grade. If an initiate succeeds at this test, he knows that the spirit's aura is masked and on which metaplane its true nature lies. The location of the spirit's aura will usually be enough information to identify the type of spirit. If the mage wants more information about the spirit, say, for example, if he wishes to view its true aura, he must undertake an astral quest with a Quest Rating equal to the spirit's Force Rating. If the magician completes this quest successfully, he will know the spirit's true name. From viewing the true aura of the spirit, he also gains the usual information available in astral space (see p. 145, SRII, and Information In Astral Space, p. 88 of this book). Free spirits with aura masking can also perceive the true nature of masked auras. The gamemaster makes a secret test similar to a Magic Success Test to see if this occurs, as described in Metamagic, p. 42, or he may simply decide to let the spirit pierce the mask automatically. Imagine the dismay of some carefully disguised initiate when the spirit he is trying to fool chuckles and asks the character why he hides his power from the world.
    
- **Dispelling**: The spirit has the metamagical power known as dispelling (see Metamagic, p. 42). The spirit uses this in the same way as an initiate, performing a Sorcery Success Test using a Skill Rating equal to its Spirit Energy and its Force Rating as its grade.
    
- **Hidden Life**: With this power the spirit hides its life force in some place or thing. Having done so, it cannot move its life again. Destroying the hiding place destroys the spirit. As long as the hiding place remains safe, however, the spirit can never be permanently banished or destroyed by any means, and all its physical forms and manifestations possess the power of regeneration (p. 219, SRII). Even when this power fails, however, the spirit is not destroyed, but merely driven away for a time. Even someone who knows its true name cannot destroy the spirit if it has hidden its life. Though the spirit's life force is protected from most normal harm in this way, much depends on the nature of the hiding place. All hiding places are protected from magical or mundane damage by "armor" equal to the spirit's Force Rating. A spirit can also hide its life in an animal, giving the animal the powers of immunity to age, immunity to normal weapons, immunity to pathogens, and immunity to toxins. The animal's Attributes also increase by a value equal to the spirit's Force Rating. Such animals become puppets of the spirit. Rumor has it that a very powerful free spirit can hide its life in a human. Presumably, the human receives the same advantages as does an animal serving as a hiding place, but the effects of such a relationship on the human will and mind remain unknown.
    
- **Human Form**: The spirit can assume any human or metahuman form it desires. While in this shape, it has the normal Attributes for its type, with the usual bonuses allotted to a free spirit. That is, its effective Force Rating equals its Force Rating plus its Spirit Energy. In addition, this form has the power of immunity to normal weapons (p. 218, SRII) at a rating equal to its Spirit Energy. The appearance of its human form, whether male or female, old or young, beautiful or hideous, is entirely up to the spirit. Killing the human form disrupts the spirit.
    
- **Personal Domain**: The spirit selects some limited area where its powers will be greater than normal. A nature spirit must choose a site in a domain appropriate to its type. The personal domain may have a maximum area of 10,000 square meters times the spirit's Force Rating. Within a spirit's personal domain, its Spirit Energy doubles. This bonus applies to all powers influenced by Spirit Energy, including those which add the Spirit Energy to the spirit's Force Rating. A spirit with a Force Rating of 4 and a Spirit Energy of 3 would have an effective Force Rating of 10 when using powers adding that bonus in its personal domain. Once it has chosen, a spirit cannot change its personal domain. If the domain is physically destroyed or drastically altered, the spirit loses its expanded power. For example, if a swamp spirit chooses a particular marsh as its personal domain, turning the marsh into a landfill destroys the personal domain. The spirit will, of course, fight ferociously to prevent such interference with its domain. Some people speculate that free spirits whose personal domains have been destroyed sometimes become toxic spirits, especially when the domain is destroyed by pollution. (See Toxic Spirits, p. 100.)
    
- **Possession**: Possession power allows the spirit to possess a living being. The spirit can use it in the following three circumstances. The spirit can attempt to possess anyone it defeats in astral combat. In order to be possessed, the victim must have a physical body. The spirit can inhabit a willing host, whether or not the host is capable of astral travel. Though the host invites the spirit to enter, the spirit decides when it will leave, unless it is exorcised. A free spirit with a personal domain can attempt to possess anyone, willing or not, astrally active or not, in that domain. It forces the victim to engage in astral combat, and can possess him if it wins. The possessed character retains his own knowledge and skills as well as the skills of the spirit. All his Physical Attributes are increased by an amount equal to the spirit's Spirit Energy Rating and all his Mental Attributes are replaced by the spirit's own. If the victim proves immune to Stun damage, or if incapacitated by Physical damage, the spirit is unharmed but driven back into astral form. Banishing the possessing spirit disrupts it rather than killing it. even if the banisher uses the spirit's true name. Spells cast at the spirit always ground into the host body. In addition, if the host did not willingly submit to possession, add +2 to all his target numbers while possessed. When a possessing spirit departs from a body, the former host must resist (Force)D Stun damage using Willpower.
    
- **Sorcery**: A spirit uses Sorcery Skill exactly as a magician does. Allies always have this power. Like any other character, the spirit spends Karma Points to increase its skill and learn spells (p. 132, SRII). The spirit, however, does not need the usual tools and props of mages and shamans. Neither does the spirit need a teacher or a spell formula, because it is always in tune with astral space, the heart and source of magic. It must still spend the same amount of time that a human magician would need to learn the spell. In addition, when casting a spell, the spirit must abide by the following special rules:
    
    - Drain does not affect the spirit. The spirit cannot, however, give the spell a Force Rating greater than Its own Force Rating.
        
    - To use Sorcery Skill on the physical plane, the spirit must manifest physically. It cannot cast spells that affect the physical plane while it remains in astral space.
        
- **Wealth**: Wealth gives the spirit the power to create precious stones or metals. A spirit sophisticated in the ways of humans may, like a genie from the Arabian Nights, produce exotic fabrics, artworks, and so on. Material so created will register as magical under detection spells and will show a magical element if assensed. Market conditions vary, of course. A fortune in the days of legend may only be a moderate charge on the credstick in 2050. The gold, jewels, and other precious items a spirit produces may be hard to sell. Even if a character finds a buyer who will waive a fence's fees, people will wonder where he came up with this stuff. The spirit produces wealth with a base value of 1,000 nuyen times its Force Rating. Roll a number of dice equal to the spirit's Spirit Energy and multiply the result by the base value. For example, a spirit with Force 4 and Spirit Energy 3 can cough up 3D6 x 4,000¥ worth of valuables. The spirit can only perform this trick once every 30 days. A free spirit active in human society—a player, for example—often uses this power to bankroll its operations. Other free spirits do not generally use it for themselves, and may even scoff at the excitement humans display when a spirit demonstrates wealth power for them.
    

 Designing Free Spirits

In the following two cases, a gamemaster may have to design a free spirit. First, he may need to make one up from scratch for an adventure. Ideally, he should design the spirit to fit his story, but he can use the random system given below if inspiration fails. The second case arises when a spirit summoned during an adventure becomes uncontrolled. It does not matter whether or not the player character summoned the spirit. The gamemaster can simply decide whether the spirit goes free or goes home (wherever home is). However, if the being stays on the physical plane as a free spirit, the gamemaster must make a few decisions about that free spirit's nature: What powers does it possess? What motivates it? How will it behave? Some ideas for answering those questions follow.

- **Spirit Type**: When designing a free spirit, the gamemaster must ask himself how it came into the material world. The answer may eliminate the need for random dice rolls. If not, roll 1D6 and consult the Spirit Generation Tables, following. Making random die rolls works well for elementals, because they can go anywhere and do fine. If the gamemaster is dealing with a free nature spirit, the spirit will likely be most comfortable in the setting where the story is set. If the gamemaster needs a free nature spirit to guard an old mine in the middle of the desert, what need is there to roll dice to find out what kind of spirit it is? After determining the type of spirit, proceed to the next section to determine its Force Rating and Spirit Energy.
    
    - **Spirit Generation Tables**
        
        - **Table 1: Spirit Type** | Die Roll | Type | |---|---| | 1-3 | Elemental. Roll 1D6 and consult Table 2. | | 4-5 | Nature spirit. Roll 1D6 and consult Table 3. | | 6 | Ally. |
            
        - **Table 2: Elemental Type** | Die Roll | Type | |---|---| | 1-3 | Fire or Water. Roll 1D6: 1-3 = Fire, 4-6 = Water. | | 4-6 | Air or Earth. Roll 1D6: 1-3 = Air, 4-6 = Earth. |
            
        - **Table 3: Nature Spirit Type** | Die Roll | Type | |---|---| | 1-2 | Spirit of Man. Roll 1D6 and consult Table 3A. | | 3-4 | Spirit of the Land. Roll 1D6 and consult Table 3B. | | 5 | Spirit of the Sky. Roll 1D6 and consult Table 3C. | | 6 | Spirit of the Water. Roll 1D6 and consult Table 3D. |
            
        - **Table 3A: Spirits of Man** | Die Roll | Type | |---|---| | 1-3 | City | | 4-5 | Hearth | | 6 | Field |
            
        - **Table 3B: Spirits of the Land** | Die Roll | Type | |---|---| | 1 | Desert | | 2-3 | Forest | | 4 | Mountain | | 5-6 | Prairie |
            
        - **Table 3C: Spirits of the Sky** | Die Roll | Type | |---|---| | 1-4 | Mist | | 5-6 | Storm |
            
        - **Table 3D: Spirits of the Water** | Die Roll | Type | |---|---| | 1-2 | Lake | | 3-4 | River | | 5 | Sea | | 6 | Swamp |
            
- **Spirit Attributes**: Having determined the kind of free spirit, the gamemaster next works out its Force Rating and Spirit Energy. Unless he wants the spirit to have a particular rating, assume that free spirits have a Force Rating of 2D6. The Spirit Energy will be 2D6 x 10 percent of the spirit's Force Rating. If the spirit scores an 11 or 12 (110 percent or 120 percent), raise its Force Rating by +1 and calculate the Spirit Energy as 10 percent or 20 percent of the new Force Rating. The spirit gets a break here because the gamemaster rounds fractions to the nearest whole number instead of rounding down as usual. After determining these two Attributes, choose the spirit's powers.
    
- **Spirit Powers**: Free spirits have all the powers common to spirits of their type. A free city spirit would have accident, alienation, and concealment powers, and so on. Spirit powers are listed in the Shadowrun rules, p. 144. Allies have the powers their designers gave them (see Designing the Ally, p. 69). In designing a free ally, the gamemaster must design it as it would have been when first conjured. As a rule of thumb, to determine the ally's cost in Karma, roll a number of dice equal to the spirit's Force Rating. The result is the amount of Karma needed to design the ally. Now roll 1D6 to determine how many powers the spirit has. The gamemaster can select the powers or randomly roll 3D6 for them, consulting the appropriate table below. If the result indicates a power the spirit already has, roll again.
    

---

 Toxic Beings

"What Truth lies beyond? A perplexing question, but one with a simple answer: All. Now, do we have the courage to look upon it?"

---Alain Vespair, Metaphysicist, 2048

"Where is it written that we must understand everything? Man has long feared that which he did not comprehend, and ignorance has caused some of the worst tragedies of history. To the misunderstood, ignorance is not bliss. But can we understand everything? Can the finite human mind ever hope to understand something cut from the primal cloth of the astral planes? How does such a being think? Why does it think? Why does it seek to do what we so clearly see as morally wrong? Is it evil? Or simply alien?"

"I'll face gunnies, samurai, BTL-freaks with choppers, anything ya send. But ain't enough nuyen in Zurich-Orbital to make me face them toxics again, chummer."

---Anonymous street samurai
Toxic beings are magical threats represented by two types of non-player character magicians and the spirits they manipulate: toxic spirits/shamans and insect spirits/shamans. These are not "character classes," but fall halfway between Critters and Archetypes/Contacts. Some magical threats have critter-like aspects because they can do things "normal" magicians cannot. For example, they can handle contacts with power that would either kill a sane human or drive him mad. Indeed, some magical threats doubtless start life as perfectly respectable magicians with "normal" powers and abilities, and then ...who knows?. Perhaps the magician suffers a trauma that breaks his mind open to sinister forces, or perhaps he arrogantly attempts a ritual to gain power humans were not meant to touch. Whatever happens somehow leaves the magician no longer entirely human. The special traits of a magical threat are wielded in addition to the formidable powers of a magician. Threats are still magicians capable of casting spells and enchantments,taking initiation, and performing any other activity their player-character counterparts can. Gamemasters should not throw too many of these at the players, however, or the group will end up with a lot of dead characters instead of interesting plot twists.

---

### TOXIC SHAMANS

Toxic shamans may have been created through tragedy, but they are actively hostile and make valuable villains for adventures. The most common type of toxic shaman is the **Avenger**,a shaman who has, for one reason or another, been turned against humanity by the horrible damage that the species has wreaked on the planet. One type of Avenger shaman might say, "I shall track and destroy the poisonous race of man until it is gone. When only 1 am left alive, I shall slay myself happily. Only then can the Mother heal Herself, free of the ravening cancer of mankind". Some toxic shamans revel in the blight, spreading the poison to feed their power. They have little to recommend them except that they make really wiz villains. These shamans are known as **Poisoners**.

Both kinds of toxic shamans are essentially loners,driven by hatred of their species and themselves. Avengers might form temporary alliances with groups such as Greenwar or the government of Amazonia. A Poisoner might be co-opted by a corp, perhaps one trying to undercut some ecological preservation scheme while making a show of"plausible deniability". The corps or groups can give their dirty work to the loony. In either case, however, the toxic shaman is only loosely bound by any group ties. A cabal of Avengers is rumored to be among the more effective border security forces of Amazonia, living in the eroded ecological ruins of the worst areas of slashed-and-­burned rain forest. They operate as terrorists, making ferocious attacks magically and militarily on any who attempt further damage to the fragile ecology on the fringes of the rain forest. Meanwhile, the more balanced magicians ofAmazonia work feverishly to restore and expand the habitat.

Some might say the toxics do not sound so crazy. Remember, however, that a toxic shaman has no compassion. Toxics punish those they perceive as Earth's enemies swiftly and mercilessly, often sentencing groups to death for the crime of the individual. Known incidents include a peasant family trying to scratch out a living from the eroded soil at the fringe of the rain forest found horribly slain by magic, and, after a merchant in a border village secretly dumped waste oil in the forest, the whole village was massacred the next night. For that matter,reports exist of magical attacks on Amazonian tribes themselves for using what the toxic shamans consider "inap­propriate technology" within the country's borders. Avengers are known for their intolerant and vicious response to any perceived threat to nature. Avengers consider humanity to be a parasite upon the Earth. As long as humans remain relatively benign, they may live. Any who threaten their host,however, must be exterminated.

Poisoners may also appear in groups, but are more likely to be loners. Their work is no less subtle: the magical grapevine is rife with rumors that evidence in recent disasters in Pennsylvania-where fires ravaged a half-dozen abandoned coal mines, causing more than 100 deaths from cave-ins and smoke inhalation in the towns built over them-point to the work of a Poisoner.

---

### TOXIC TOTEMS

A toxic shaman chooses a totem just as a normal shaman does. Avengers tend to choose wilderness totems,while Poisoners lean toward urban totems. This does not represent a moral judgment on the relative merits of totems,but reflects the psychologies of the two types of toxic shamans. Toxic shamans receive all the normal benefits of the shamanic tradition, and must abide by the taboos and customs of their totem. These are always interpreted in light of their toxic alignment, however. A toxic Eagle shaman for example, views it as his sacred duty to destroy polluters as supreme examples of evil. Poisoner shamans may reverse the normal mandates of the totem. A toxic Dog shaman would be a rabid thing,literally a ferocious destroyer of humanity, ravening for the lives of those he would normally protect.

---

### TOXIC SPIRITS

Normal shamans cannot conjure nature spirits from badly polluted domains (see Toxic Domains, following). Guess who can summon such spirits?  That's right. Only a toxic shaman can summon or control a toxic spirit. Another magician can banish toxic spirits, but a control contest will only free the spirit if its original summoner loses control (seeControl Contests, p. 143, SRII). Toxic free spirits do exist, and are very, very bad news. In addition to possessing the other powers of free spirits,such a being can grant a bonus to a (non-player character)toxic shaman's Threat Rating equal to the toxic spirit's SpiritEnergy. If this human ally can increase his Threat Rating (see Threat Ratings, p. 107 of this section), the toxic spirit'sSpirit Energy goes up, too. If the magician fails his tasks,losing Threat Rating, the spirit also loses Spirit Energy. Shamans who cost their twisted master too many points are often discarded in some painful manner.

Toxic spirits are twisted and crippled-looking, warped by the pollution of their domain. Their nature is apparent to any astral onlooker. The shaman's tests for summoning and resisting Drain are based on the Force Rating he allocates to the conjuring. However, the spirit's actual Force Rating is increased when summoned by the background count of the area in an amount commensurate with its pollution level (seeBackground Count, p. 89). Facing toxic spirits on their " home turf" is a remarkably bad idea. And that turf can move. A toxic shaman can summon a spirit and send it, in manifest form, outside the domain. If a toxic shaman in a blasted area of the Barrens (a toxic city domain), summons up a street spirit, an opponent cannot escape by running into a house (hearth domain). The thing can follow him there, or anywhere.

---

### TOXIC DOMAINS

A river streaked with a half-dozen poison-bright strands of chemicals; a wood where toxic waste leaches into the soil, killing the trees where they stand; or an abandoned factory, a concrete graveyard of rusting machinery and waste tanks without a single pulse to show that once humans lived and worked here, are all toxic domains. In such places, nature has been twisted, raped, or ground flat and embalmed in plastic and concrete. The nature spirits in these areas, warped by the damage done to their domain, cannot be summoned by any sane shaman. An insane shaman is another matter, as discussed inToxic Shamans,above . straightforward when dealing with natural domains, but Spirits of Man pose a different problem. If it were just a question of pollution, city spirits would all be toxic, but this is not the case. Unlike nature spirits, Spirits of Man are tied not to environmental conditions, but to the human condition . of life, no matter what the level of material comfort. Auschwitz, Kampuchea, or Abilene . with ranks of mindless wage slaves. The powers of the hermetic magician are dispassionate. Elementals neither weep nor rejoice at human misery. Shamanic spirits, however, echo that which creates them, whether the pulse of life in a normal domain or the twisted poison of a toxic one. No sane shaman may safely deal with the world and the source of the insect spirits (perhaps their own metaplane) cannot be penetrated by insect spirits, and they need a denizen of this world to bring them through. The manner in which they come into this world seems to prove this theory.

Insect spirits apparently have difficulty existing in this world in their true form. Most of them need host bodies to anchor them in the physical plane. Only the most powerful insect spirits can transcend the host body and exist in this world in their true form.

---

### Hive Insect Spirits

Hive insect spirits come in two types, each of which has two forms. The **worker spirit**, as its name suggests, performs the grunt work of the hive. The **soldier spirit** protects the hive and the Queen. Both workers and soldiers can be either **true-form** spirits with both astral and manifest forms, or **flesh-form** spirits who merge permanently with the host and become a twisted amalgamation of spirit and flesh.

Prior to summoning the Queen spirit, the insect shaman may only control a number of true-form worker or soldier spirits equal to 10 times his Threat Rating. The maximum total of Force Rating Points they may possess is equal to the sum of the shaman's Magic Rating plus 5 times his ThreatRating. Flesh-form spirits of either type do not count against this total. All these spirits are loyal to the shaman and will act under his direction, unless their Queen directly and explicitly orders otherwise. Once summoned and present, the Queen may boost the shaman's effective Threat Rating to increase the number of spirits he directly controls. If she later uses that same SpiritEnergy to boost her own Force Rating, the shaman loses the bonus to his Threat Rating. The Queen, once summoned,behaves as a free spirit and follows the appropriate rules (see Free Spirits, pp. 76-83). Note, however, that she is not actually free and does not have a free spirit's powers or abilities, with the exception of Spirit Energy, until she gains her freedom (see Free Spirits, p. 76).

Working together, the Queen and the insect shaman can summon a number of Force Rating Points per day in spirits equal to the Queen's Force Rating plus the shaman'sMagic Attribute plus his unmodified Threat Rating. A soldier's spirit is worth twice its Force Rating in points, and a workerspirit is worth a number of points equal to its Force Rating. The maximum number of true-form spirits in a hive is equal to the Queen's Force Rating multiplied by the shaman's Body Attribute for soldiers, and the Queen's Force Rating times the shaman's Willpower times 10 for workers. The Queen and the shaman struggle constantly to balance opposing forces. The Queen demands that the shaman sacrifice points from his own Threat Rating to increase her Spirit Energy at a ratio of 2 Threat Rating Points for every 1 point of Spirit Energy. At the same time, the shaman attempts to increase his Threat Rating in order to maintain the number of insect spirits he directly controls and his own personal power as well.

---

### Summoning Insect Spirits

An insect shaman can summon insect spirits in any domain where insects can survive, which is to say slottin'near everywhere. Regardless of the domain, he may summon a worker, a soldier, or a Queen spirit. (Note that this rule varies somewhat depending on the type of insect spirits in question. Specific differences are addressed in a later section) . To summon a worker or soldier spirit, the gamemaster uses the normal conjuring procedure found on page 139 ofSRII. To summon an insect Queen, use the following rules and the rules for summoning a great-form spirit (SpiritForms, p. 64 of this book). Does this mean that the insect shaman must be an initiate to summon the Queen? Sure does. And because he will most likely be self-initiated. hewill hatch lots of nefarious schemes to acquire the Karma he needs to become initiated. However, because non-playercharacters do not have Karma, the gamemaster can have the insect shaman sacrifice Threat Rating Points to use as the equivalent of Karma. (The gamemaster should feel free to give a non-player character opponent any increases or adjustments necessary to provide a good story) .

When summoned, the insect spirit must be incubated in a human host body. During a period of time in weeks equal to the Force Rating of the spirit, a transformation occurs. The lower the host's Willpower is compared to the Force Rating of the possessing spirit, the greater the transformation. AQueen always manifests as a true-form spirit. A flesh-form worker will always appear as some bizarre compromise between the insect form and the original host. A soldier's form, on the other hand, may vary considerably.

To determine the extent of the transformation for a soldier or worker, make an opposed Success Test (p. 214,SRII) between the host body and the spirit. The host pits itsWillpower Rating against a target number equal to twice theForce Rating of the spirit, and vice versa. If a Queen helped summon the spirit, add +2 to the host's target number (twice the Force Rating of the spirit). Consult the following table for the host.

**Successes Result**

* **0/Queen generates more successes:** The host is destroyed and a true-form insect spirit emerges.
* **1-2:** The host body acquires primary resemblance to the true form,such as changes in body shape and mass, additional limbs, and so on. A flesh form is created.
* **3:** The host body acquires some true-form characteristics,including growing chitinous ar­mor, multi-faceted eyes,underdeveloped extra limbs, so on. A flesh form is created.
* **4:** The host body acquires only one of the physical aspects of the true form. A flesh form is created.
* **5+:** The host body retains its original form and acquires the free-spirit power of aura masking. It is not,however, a free spirit, remains under the control of theQueen or shaman. Technically it is a flesh form, but the spirit gains access to the host's memories and can mimic the host. If this ability manifests in a hospital occupied by a worker spirit, rehabilitation usually remains unused.

---

### Flesh Form Insect Spirits

A flesh form insect spirit appears as a bizarre cross between the host's human body and the insect appearance of the actual spirit. The extent of the transformation in the flesh-form soldier varies, ranging from barely noticeable to obvious. The flesh-form worker always transforms to a half-human half-insect creature. The will of the insect spirit always consumes that of the original host. All flesh-form spirits are dual beings.

**Flesh Form Worker**

The flesh-form worker's Physical Attributes are I pointless than the host's. Their Mental Attributes are the same as the trueform worker's. Flesh-form workers have the power of skill (see SpecialPowers, following) and the weakness of reduced senses (sight). They do not possess the power of enhanced senses (smell) or have vulnerability to insecticides.

**Flesh Form Soldier**

The Mental Attributes of the flesh-form soldier are the same as those of the true-form soldier. Its Physical AttributeRatings equal the host body's ratings added to the spirit'sForce Rating. Flesh-form soldiers do not possess the powers of enhanced senses (smell), paralyzing touch, or venom. They also lose their weakness of reduced senses (sight) and their vulnerability to insecticides. They have no natural armor,though they may wear manufactured armor if the Queen or shaman orders them to.

---

### True Form Insect Spirits

The true-form insect spirit has the ability to operate in astral space using its astral form and to manifest in the mundane world. All true-form insect spirits have minimumAttribute Ratings of 1. A true-form insect spirit appears as the actual insect, but near man-size and perfect in form.

---

### Queen Spirit

The Queen spirit is the conduit of power for the shaman,Even before being summoned, she acts as the focus of his magic, his personal totem. Once she is in the physical world,the Queen will chafe under the shaman's yoke and almost immediately attempt to become free. In addition to the usual ways that a spirit can go free, the Queen can try to break control in the same way as an ally (see Allies, p. 67), or attempt to go free whenever the shaman increases or decreases his Threat Rating. Because the Queen and the shaman controlling her are non-player characters, the gamemaster can simply set the Queen free when it suits his adventure. The Queen works to make her nest on Earth stronger and safer and to extend its influence. This can be a brutally direct effort to bring more spirits through the barrier, possess more humans, and take over territory, or a more subtle design involving use of compulsive substances, political influence, wealth, and so on. The original shaman (or a more competent replacement)functions as the nest's principal representative in the human world. The Queen is larger than human-sized, usually four to six meters long.

An insect shaman can summon only one Queen. If she is banished or destroyed, all his magic power departs with her,and is gone forever. If she is disrupted, he loses the use of the additional Threat Rating she provides through her SpiritEnergy (and thus all the other insect spirits he controls) until she can return to the world. If the Queen goes free, the shaman retains his power only if the Queen wills it. If a Queen makes a willing alliance with a shaman, she can grant him a bonus to his ThreatRating equal to her SpiritEnergy. As with toxic free spirits (Toxic Spirits, p. 100), if the insect shaman can increase his Threat Rating, it increases the Queen's Spirit Energy. Conversely, if he losesThreat Rating, then the Queen's Spirit Energy also decreases. The insect shaman does not have to summon the Queenspirit, but his powers quickly reach a limit without her active presence on the physical plane.

---

### Special Powers

Insect spirits have access to certain special powers,mostly focused on the Queen. The Queen also possesses the standard spirit powers per the basic SRII rules.

* **Animal Control (insects):** The Queen can send swarms of insects to gather information, attack en masse (deadly in the case of wasp spirits), and so on.
* **Compulsion:** The Queen can exude a wide variety of pheromones that create overriding compulsions in humans. She can affect anyone smelling these essences, which are effective to a distance of her Force Rating in meters. She can also secrete the pheromones in a form that can be mixed into food or drink, used as a drug, and blended with other substances.
* **Skill:** When summoned, a worker can be given any nonmagical Build/Repair or other similar skill the summoner wishes. It can use this skill with a rating equal to its Force.
* **Summoning:** Summoning takes place according to the rules above,requiring both the host and the spirit to make a SuccessTest. If the host is a player character or important non-player character, make an opposed Success Test using the Queen'sForce Rating and the character's Willpower, each against aTarget Number of 6. (Yes, the character can most certainly use Karma) . The Queen receives a target number modifier of+I for every point of Essence up to 6 that the character has lost. If the Queen generates fewer successes, she loses, and the character cannot be possessed by her spirit. If the Queen is destroyed or disrupted, all her worker and soldier spirits, whether summoned by herself or the shaman,are destroyed. Possessed humans also die.

Insect spirits may be banished or dispelled, but any spirits, including the Queen, in true form have their ForceRatings effectively doubled. If the spirit is defeated, the hostbody will die. Once the initial incubation of the spirit has begun, no way exists to save the host (subject, as always, to gamemaster discretion).

---

### Hive Insect Spirits

The following section describes the common forms in which insect spirits appear. All statistics and powerdescriptions are for true form manifestations.

**Ant Spirits**

Highly social beings, ant spirits cooperate exceptionally well within a single hive. Ant hives are comprised of numerous workers and soldiers and one Queen. The territorial instincts of ant spirits often lead to intense rivalry between hives. Ant spirits are builders, constructing complex warrens with multiple levels and no apparent logic visible by human standards. Ant spirits tend to be clean, tidy, and quiet. Antspirits make their hives most often below ground in space they have either tunneled out or heavily modified. Only rarely do ant spirits work alone. The Queen or her shaman usually prefer to send them en masse against an objective. When subtlety is called for (provided the shaman can convince the Queen that rolling out the army will do more harm than good) ant spirits work in small groups of two to four.

**Ant Spirit Soldier**

B Q SC IWE R Attacks
F + 1 / F(F + 4) x 4 F+4 --F 2 (F)A Fx2*(Str)M or Special*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10when physically manifest.
Powers: Enhanced Senses (Smell), Paralyzing Touch, Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (Insecticides)

**Ant Spirit Worker**

B Q SC I W ER Attacks
F-2 / F-3 F x 3 F+2 --F-2 1 (F)A 3* None
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Enhanced Senses (Smell), Skill
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Ant Queen**

B Q S CIW E R Attacks
F+ 5 / F (F + 6) x 5 F+6 F F F (F)A F x 3* (Str)S or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Animal Control (Ants), Compulsion, Enhanced
Senses (Smell), Fear, Immunity to Normal Weapons, Paralyzing Touch. Summoning, Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Fly Spirits**

Fly spirits have a hive of sorts, but unlike ants or wasps,have no caste system. All members of the hive, except for the Queen, are male. The males serve as both warriors or workers, but prove less skilled and less effective than anti-spirits in either role. Fly hives are chaotic, noisy, ill-kept messes that reek with the overpowering odor of refuse. Fly spirits can settle their hives almost anywhere, but they prefer ramshackle,broken-down spots.

**Male Fly Spirit**

B Q SC IWE R Attacks
F / F-2 (F+1) x 4 F+2 --F-1 1 (F)A F x 2* (Str)M or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Enhanced Senses (Smell), Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Fly Queen**

B Q S CIW E R Attacks
F+4 / F (F+4) x 5 F+4 F F F (F)A F x 3* (Str)S or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Animal Control (Fly), Compulsion, Enhanced
Senses (Smell), Fear, Immunity to Normal Weapons, Summoning, Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Termite Spirits**

Termite spirits have a caste system similar to that of ants, composed of workers, soldiers, and a Queen. Adept at burrowing, termite workers build cement-hard "mounds" and"towers" by mixing sand with their saliva to make a fast-hardening, concrete-like material. Though less territorially ambitious than ants, termites fight ferociously in defense of their territory. Termites build their hives above ground, usually inside abandoned human structures to avoid detection, unless they are in an isolated locale. The neat, tidy interior of the termite hive strongly resembles an ant hive. The area outside the hive, however, shows the signs of the termites' presence: discarded materials and random destruction.

**Termite Spirit Soldier**

B Q S CIW E R Attacks
F+1 / F (F+4) x 4 F+5 --F 2 (F)A F x 2* (Str)M or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Enhanced Senses (Smell), Paralyzing Touch, Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Termite Spirit Worker**

B Q SC I W E RAttacks
F-2/F-3 F x 3 F+3 --F-2 1 (F)A 3* None
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Enhanced Senses (Smell), Skill
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Termite Queen**

B Q S CIW E R Attacks
F+5 / F (F+6) x 5 F+6 F F F (F)A F x 3* (Str)S or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Animal Control (Termite), Compulsion, Enhanced
Senses (Smell), Fear, Immunity to Normal Weapons, Paralyzing Touch, Summoning
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Wasp Spirits**

Wasp spirits have no caste system, and multiple females can live in a single hive. Only the Queen reaches sexual maturity. Males are territorial and not overly intelligent. Females have a malign intelligence, especially prominent in the Queen at egg-laying time. A Queen must lay her eggs in the body of a host creature who has been paralyzed with a toxin she secretes, usually during a spirit summoning. When the eggs hatch, the larvae either merge with the host and become flesh forms, or feed on the host and eat their way to the outside world as true forms. Though complex structures, wasp hives are far smaller than the hives of the other insect spirits. A wasp hive manages to cram far more spirits into the smaller area. Wasphives must be built in high places, open to the air. Waspspirits prefer the upper stories of buildings and other towering structures.

**Male Wasp Spirit**

B Q SC I WE R Attacks
F / F-1 (F+4) x 4 F+3 --F-1 1 (F)A F x 2* (Str)M or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Enhanced Senses (Smell), Paralyzing Touch, Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Female Wasp Spirit**

B Q SCIW E R Attacks
F+1 / F-1 (F+4) x 4 F+4 --F 2 (F)A F x 2* Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Enhanced Senses (Smell), Paralyzing Touch, Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Wasp Queen**

B Q SC I WE R Attacks
F+4 / F (F+5) x 5 F+5 F F F (F)A F x 3* (Str)S or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Animal Control (Wasp), Compulsion, Enhanced
Senses (Smell), Fear, Immunity to Normal Weapons, Paralyzing Touch, Summoning, Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

---

### Solitary Insect Spirits

Other forms of insect spirits exist in addition to hivespirits. These solitary spirits, so called because they require no hive, are in many cases more powerful and cunning than their communal counterparts. Some may have nests where they live, but feel no strong connection to that nest and can leave it at any time, subject to the will of the shaman (if one exists). The major difference between hive and solitary insect spirits is the absence of a Queen spirit, and the possible absence of a shaman. A shaman must summon the first female, but thereafter all female spirits are capable of self-perpetuation. The roach and the mantid spirits provide two common examples of solitary insect spirits. All statistics are for true-form manifestations.

**Roach Spirits**

Roach spirits build nests, not because they have to, but because they like to. Male roach spirits cluster around the female that "birthed" them, thereby creating the nest. More than one mother roach spirit can occupy a nest (subject to the group dynamics of the females) but more than three females rarely share any one location. A Roach shaman summons male roach spirits according to the conjuring rules found on page 139 of SRII. The Roachshaman can only have under his control a number of roachspirits of either sex equal to his Magic Attribute Rating plus his Willpower, multiplied by his Threat Rating. Once he has reached that number, he cannot summon any more roach spirits without the aid of at least one mother roach spirit. With the assistance of a mother roach spirit, an unlimited number of roach spirits can be brought into existence.

Mother roach spirits are much harder to summon than male roach spirits. The shaman conjures a mother roach spirit according to the standard conjuring rules, except that when calculating the Drain the magician must resist, add 50percent (round resulting fractions up) to the mother roachspirit's Force Rating. For example, a mother roach spirit summoned at Force 5 would have an effective Force Rating of 7.5 for the conjuror making the Drain Resistance Test. Rounding the fraction up gives a result of 8, meaning that the summoner would have to resist Drain at Force 8. A motherroach spirit has Spirit Energy (see Free Spirits, p. 76), but has no other free spirit powers or abilities unless she gains her freedom. Per day, a mother roach spirit can create male roach spirits by investing host bodies with Force, using up to a number of Force Rating Points equal to the mother roach'sForce Rating plus her Spirit Energy. The maximum ForceRating that the mother roach can invest in a single spirit in one day equals the mother roach spirit's Force Rating. Mother roach spirits cannot create other mother roach spirits in this manner unless the shaman allows it. However, a freemother roach spirit can create other females as well as males in this manner. Producing another female requires a number of days equal to twice the "birthing" spirit's Force Rating, which creates another mother roach spirit at the same Force Rating as the first mother roach spirit. The shaman, if he so desires,can allow any mother roach spirit that he controls to create another of her kind according to the above rules. During the time the female spends bringing forth another female for investment, she can create no other roach spirits. From birth to maturity, investing a spirit into a host takes10 days. To determine whether or not male roach spirits are true form or flesh form, follow the rules for producing soldier spirits found on page 103. Mother roach spirits only manifest in true form. Roach spirit nests can be anywhere, and like physical roach nests, usually appear where players least expect them.

**Male Roach Spirit**

B Q SCI WE R Attacks
F+2 / F+1 (F+4) x 4 F+2 --F-1 1 (F)A F x 2* (Str)M or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Enhanced Senses (Smell), Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Mother Roach Spirit**

B Q SC IW E R Attacks
F+3 / F+2 (F+3) x 4 F+1 -F 2 (F)A F x 2* (Str)S or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Animal Control (Roach), Compulsion, Enhanced
Senses (Smell), Fear, Immunity to Normal Weapons, Summoning, Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Mantid Spirits**

Mantid spirits fly in the face, so to speak, of what humanity knows about insect spirits. Generally considered destructive and malign. mantids differ from other insect spirits in one interesting respect. Though other insects seek single-mindedly to propagate their species, one of the mantid's primary goals is to consume other insects. Singularly powerful, mantid spirits can be difficult for the shaman to keep under control. The male mantid spirit,substantially less intelligent and less powerful than the female, apparently exists primarily to serve and service the female. Male Mantid shamans are nearly unheard of; the stronger and more cunning female mantid spirit chafes under male control. Female Mantid shamans can develop stronger partnership with mantid spirits, though they, too,risk their safety in dealing with these formidable beings. Male mantids serve a female for a short period of time,until the female is ready to create more mantid spirits. At this time the male and female spirits merge, after which the female can produce more spirits. This merging destroys the male spirit. At any one time, a Mantid shaman can only control one female mantid spirit and a number of males equal to his or her Magic Attribute Rating. The shaman summons malemantid spirits according to the conjuring rules on page 139of SRII. To summon a female mantid spirit, use the procedure for summoning a great form spirit in Spirit Forms,p. 64 of this book.

The female mantid spirit can create new mantids every 2D6 weeks. When she is ready to create new spirits, she must merge with and consume at least one male mantidspirit to produce the energy necessary to invest the new mantis spirits. She can consume a number of male mantidspirits whose total Force Ratings equal her Force Rating plus her Spirit Energy. If she exceeds that energy threshold and cannot fully consume the male mantid currently merging with her, the male retains only the Force the female could not consume. The next time the female creates new mantids, she will begin the process by consuming the half-eaten male. Each merging and consumption takes a number of hours equal to the male mantid's Force Rating. Following each merging and consumption cycle, a female can invest a number of new mantid spirits with a total number of Force Rating Points equal to twice theForce she consumed. The investment must be made into a human host body of the same sex as the mantid spirit created. Investing a male mantid costs the female mantidspirit I point of the total number of Force Rating Points available for each point of Force Rating given to the new spirit. Investing a female mantid requires 2 points for each point of Force the newly created spirit will have. The investment process takes 1 hour per Force Rating Point given to the new spirit. Female mantids always manifest in flesh form, showing no signs of the insect form. Each female mantid also gains the free spirit power of aura masking and the memories of her host, who she can mimic. Male mantids always invest as true forms. Despite their different forms,the female mantid can always merge and consume the malemantid. As long as a shaman controls her, a female mantidspirit cannot produce other female mantid spirits, unless the shaman allows it. Mantids tend to live among humanity, becoming as much a part of it as their alien nature permits.

**Male Mantid Spirit**

B Q SC IW E R Attacks
F+2 / F+1 (F+5) x 4 F+3 -F-1 2 (F)A F x 3* (Str)M or Special
*Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10
when physically manifest.
Powers: Enhanced Senses (Smell), Venom
Weaknesses: Reduced Senses (Sight), Vulnerability (
Insecticides)

**Female Mantid Spirit**

B Q S CIW E R Attacks
H*+F / F (H+F) x 4 H+F F F F (F)A F x 3** (Str)S or Special*Use the host's Attribute Rating as the base.**Receives a +20 Initiative bonus in astral space, and +10when physically manifest.
Powers: Animal Control (Mantids), Compulsion, Enhanced
Senses (Smell), Fear, Summoning
Weaknesses: Vulnerability (Insecticides)

---

### Threat Ratings

The Threat Rating of a toxic or insect shaman may vary during an adventure. Such magicians must often carry out strange tasks that spell disaster for anyone nearby. When the magician carries out the task successfully, his ThreatRating increases. If he is thwarted, his rating goes down. The magician may try to perform these unsavory tasks on his own or order his nefarious agents to carry them out. Either way, a major part of an adventure involving toxic characters will mean discovering and foiling these activities in order to weaken the enemy. The gamemaster should assign an initial Threat Rating to a magical threat in an adventure, then design a series of tasks the toxic or insect shaman must carry out. Each taskthe shaman accomplishes increases hisThreat Rating by +1, and each one foiled decreases the rating by the same amount. Additionally, each task should have a loophole that allows the player characters to attempt to disrupt the evil scheme.

**Toxic Threat**

A typical toxic shaman is created with a I D6 ThreatRating. During an adventure, he may attempt to complete one or more of the following tasks, or other, similar tasks.

* Destroy a community that is clearing wilderness land (suitable to Avenger shamans).
* Assassinate executives in an organization that is either polluting the land or trying to repair environmental damage,depending on the type of shaman involved.
* Foment riots and destruction in an urban area or strike such an area with a plague, fatal levels of toxic waste, or other disaster.

**Insect Threat**

Insect shaman Threat Ratings start at 1D6 / 2 (rounddown). These Threat Ratings change as fulfilled or unfulfilled tasks make the nest stronger or weaker. Keep in mind that these tasks may seem utterly absurd to human "commonsense". Likely insect shaman tasks include:

* The shaman must get a series of articles distributed in the datanets that level serious allegations against a police or other group that threatens the nest. If the articles can be disproved, the task is foiled.
* A series of antiques of the Neolithic Age must be stolen from several collections, (both public and private). These are to be used as raw materials in preparing a unique enchantment.
* The nest requires the use of a certain city block for a week, beginning on a specific date. Residents will be cleared out by bribery or extortion, or else captured and possessed.
* The shaman must get 20 possessed humans working on a given project.

The difficulty we have today. The impossible is over in R&D.

--Unofficial motto of EBM², Division of Thaumaturgy

spells: the constructs of magic. Though many may come from the same formula, each is as unique as a handmade item. The creator's hand is always evident in the spell's form, shape, and texture. The creator must take special care when making something so personal. Short cuts and the path of least resistance always produce less­than-satisfactory results. As with science, there are rules to be followed. As with art, inspiration is everything. A combination of those two disciplines, spell design is a true craft.

---

### Spell Design

Spells are the tools and weapons and toys of sorcery. Magicians spend a lot of time and effort creating spells because spells are what give them power in the Sixth World. The following explanations of spells include clarifications of the spellcasting rules from the basic game.

---

### How Spells Work

When a magician uses his inherent genetic ability to contact astral space, he casts a spell. He opens a channel between the physical and etheric planes, configuring the channel according to his knowledge of spellcasting and the formula of the spell he is casting. The result is a spell construct on the etheric plane. This construct is "programmed" by the spell formula. It moves at blinding speed from its caster to its target. Its basic energy is the Force the magician allocates to the spellcasting process. He can "add on" extra dice from foci, spirits, and so on after the basic construct forms, but these do not increase the spell's Force. These dice will take effect if the spell reaches its target, but do not make it any stronger until that time. All of the above takes place virtually instantaneously when the magician casts his spell. When a spell reaches its target, it creates the effect the magician desires by transferring astral energy into the physical plane. Because this process connects the aura of the casting magician directly to the aura of his target, spellcasting requires line-of-sight targeting. Area spells set up a web of energy that connects the caster and all his targets into a single astral network and affects all viable targets within an area of effect. The effects of this energy transfer depend on the spell's design: it may create or destroy, heal or harm.

Spellcasting is a matter of intention and mental control. For example, brash young sorcerers often attempt to aim an area-effect spell through a pinhole to limit the effect to a single target, and then they wonder why the spell misfires under such circumstances. Might as well ask a painter wearing tinted lenses why the color values in a painting are false. How can a magician capture the universe-embracing exaltation of spirit that is the key to magic when he is playing such mind games with himself?. It has been said that the emotional energy needed to cast a spell must be as strong as that needed to perform the action physically. Casting a death spell requires killing fury. An illusion requires the laughing creativity of Coyote himself. A magician using manipulation must possess the same monomania as an artist working on a masterpiece. One definition of magic is the ability to go mad in a very specific way for a limited time. From the psychological viewpoint, a spell is an induced neurosis or even a psychosis, created for a split second to channel psychic energy in a particular way. Confusing this delicate process with calculating, rational thought may leave the magician unable to do much else.

---

### Spell Force

Some confusion exists over just what constitutes the Force of a spell. A magician learns a spell with a maximum Force Rating. He can cast the spell with a Force Rating ranging from 1 up to this maximum. This figure, and only this figure, is the actual Force of the spell. Additional dice allocated to enhance the caster's Success Test do not count toward increasing the Force Rating of the spell. Only the actual Force Rating is used to determine whether Drain inflicts Physical or Stun damage. Only the actual Force Rating is used as the basis for the target number of the caster'sDrain Resistance Test. The modifiers gained from exclusive spells and fetish-required spells (p. 133, SRII) do not modify the actualForce, but do alter the effective Force Rating for the purposes of determining the spell's effect. On the down side, the actual Force Rating is the one the spell uses for astral combat or to resist dispelling (seeMetamagic, p. 42).

Does this mean a magician with Sorcery/Magic Pool of 6,a Power Focus (3), and a +2 Totem Advantage for a spell can cast it with Force 1, and then roll 11 dice to smack the target? Yes. And then roll against a Target Number of 2 to resistDrain? Yes again. (Remember, 2 is the lowest possible target number in Shadowrun) . In this case, however, the magician has used up all hisMagic Pool and focus dice offensively. If someone tosses a spell at him before his next action, he has nothing to augment a defense. It also means that the target of the spell resists damage using a Target Number of 2. The magician makes a tradeoff by keeping his Drain target number low for his own safety and counting on generating significantly more successes (by rolling more dice) than the target can generate. But gee, doesn't that mean that a team with a magician will clean up against enemies without magical support?  That is exactly what it means. Welcome to the Sixth World, where magic is power.

---

### Combat Spells

Combat spells pump damaging energy directly into the aura(s) of the target(s). The magician's successes (if any)from the Spell Success Test increase the spell's DamageLevel by I for every 2 successes. All combat spells have an initial Damage Level based on the design of the spell. Combat spells can be one of two types, physical or mana. Physical spells do their damage directly to the cellular level and are resisted by the Body Attribute. Mana spells pour their energy into the aura of the target, and are therefore resisted by Willpower. The target still takes Physical damage,however, because the damage done to the aura is immediately transferred to the physical body. The only exception to this rule is when a spell formula is specifically constructed to do Stun damage, and does not inflict physical damage. Either physical or mana spells may be designed as Stun damage spells.

**Area-Effect Spells**

Area-effect combat spells affect all targets equally in the area of effect that the magician can see. It might help players to think of area-effect spells as occurring in a sphere-shaped field of damage, rather than as an explosion radiating from a central point (like a grenade). Damage occurs instantly and simultaneously throughout the area of effect.

The Barrier Ratings of any cover have no effect in resisting combat spells. The only important factor is how well the spellcaster can see the target. This holds true for all types of combat spells. A potential target out of the casting character's sight, but within the area of the spell's effect cannot be affected by the spell. Because the target cannot be seen, it cannot be affected. A magician casting a combat spell designed to affect targets inside a magical barrier cannot affect those targets as long as the magician casting the barrier remains outside the barrier. (The barrier protects those inside it) . If the magician casting the barrier is inside the barrier, it does not protect those inside with him, but does protect targets outside from his spells. (See barrier spell description, p. 158, SRII) .

Physical spells can, theoretically, blast everything in the area, almost like an explosion. The gamemaster need not worry much about this, except for special effects ("The guy in front falls down screaming and the windshield of the car behind him blows out.") or to restrain exuberant magicians from casting powerball spells in elevators ("Floor? Whatfloor?"). Spellcasters cannot simply selectively ignore validtargets -friend, foe, or neutral-within the spell's area of effect. The only way to control the targets affected is to vary the spell's actual area per the rules on p. 130, SRII. SpellDefense dice (p. 132, SRII) or Shielding dice (Metamagic, p.42) allocated by the caster to protect his friends cannot be used if those same people in turn become the targets of an area-effect spell cast by that same magician. Spell Defense or Shielding dice allocated by a magician other than the spellcaster may still be used, however.

**Range Modifiers (Optional Rule)**

Because spellcasting is limited only by line of sight,nothing prevents a magician from hitting a target kilometers away, as long as that target can be seen. Gamemasters wishing to place some limits on long-range spellcasting may apply modifiers for targets at extreme range, per the SpellRange Modifiers Table. This range modifier should be applied in addition to any visibility modifiers (see p. 89, SRII).

**Spell Range Modifiers Table**

Range to Target (in meters) Modifier
0-150 None
151-300 -2
301-600 -4
601-1,250 -6
1,251-2,500 -8
2,501-5,000 -10
5,001+ Target not visible

The distances given in the above table are for flat,ground-level terrain at sea level under clear skies (little or no atmospheric interference). Gamemasters will have to improvise and adjust the modifiers accordingly for higher altitudes (potentially a greater visible distance, depending on intervening terrain and atmospherics), atmospheric conditions, intervening terrain, target size, and so on. The above range-modifier optional rule should only be used in those extraordinary situations where such a restriction seems practical and necessary. ("Hey! The rules say that if I have line of sight to the guy then I can hit him, right? So what if he's kilometers down range...") .

---

### Detection Spells

Detection spells can be either physical or mana spells. Detection spells are used to enhance the senses or analyze the environment. They allow the magician, or the recipient of the spell, to sense things in a manner normally beyond his or her ability, to see or hear from a great distance, and other such feats. Detection spells can also be used to detect magic or magical presences.

**Range**

Unless a spell description specifically states that the spell can only be cast on the magician himself, all published detection spells can be cast on anyone. They can be sustained on that target as long as the caster wishes. The center of the spell's effect is determined by the subject or target the spell is cast on. If the spell is cast on a person, the information gained from that spell is known by that person,not the spellcaster. If the spell is cast on the caster himself, it is the caster who learns the information.

**Target Numbers**

When making the Success Test for a general detection spell, note the actual results rolled. (For target numbers, seeDetection Spells, p. 152, SRII) . For example, a magician rolling 12, 8, 6, 4, and 3 when casting a detect enemy spell generates successes against a variety of opponents. He has 4 successes against targets he can see (Target Number 4), 3 successes against an invisible enemy or one lurking in hidden ambush (Target Number 6), and 1 success against an enemy stalking him in astral space.

---

### Manipulation Spells

Manipulation spells can be physical or mana spells and are used to transform, transmute, control, or animate matter or energy. They are complex, and difficult to control and master.

**Damaging Manipulations**

Some players and gamemasters have found the explanation of manipulation spells that do damage confusing as presented in the basic rules. In this spell, the magician creates a physical effect that does damage rather than pumping astral energy directly into a target. The effect is aimed and uses the same modifiers as ranged combat. TheBase Target Number for the Sorcery Test is 4. A magician can aim an area-effect spell at a point in space rather than at a specific target. As with physical ranged combat, the successes generated by the casting magician are compared to the successes generated by the target, and each stages any netsuccesses. Having determined the final Damage Level, the target resists the spell's damage normally. Use a number of dice equal to the Body Attribute to make the Damage ResistanceTest, adding any dermal armor modifiers. The Force Rating of the spell is the Power Level of the attack. Impact armor resists damage, but at one-half (round down) its normal rating, reducing the Force Rating of the spell. The target may use dice from his Combat Pool to resist damage.

Unlike against combat spells, hard cover does add its protective effects against damaging manipulation spells (BarrierRatings, p. 98, SRII). In the case of area-effect spells, all characters within the area of effect must resist the damage, similar to the way they would resist damage from grenades. The actual area of effect is calculated per the rules on p. 130, SRII. Unlike with combat spells, the magician need not see the targets of an area-effect spell to affect them, because the damage from a manipulation spell is real, physical damage and affects anyone it can reach. In an odd quirk of metaphysics, theDamage Code for an area-effect manipulation spell is the same throughout the area of effect. It does not get weaker as it radiates from the center of the effect (as with grenades). Barriers do diffuse the spell's energy and reduce thePower (or Force), protecting those beyond. (See BarrierRatings, p. 98, SRII) . Damaging manipulations always involve elemental effects (see below). Elemental effects allow the spell to damage and also may create side effects. The materials and energy created by the spell are still "magical," however. A spell will not leave shrapnel lying around or puddles of acid eating away at everything touches.

---

### Elemental Effects

Damaging manipulation spells and combat spells with physical side effects produce "elemental effects," that is, they use the elements of nature to do damage. They are not connected to elemental spirits, though some spells have effects similar to those of spirits. This section suggests various types of elemental effects, but the gamemaster should feel free to explore additional possibilities. Elemental effects do "primary" and "secondary" damage. Primary damage is determined by the Damage Code of the spell. The primary damage may react to armor and other defenses in various ways, and may also include side effects that always occur with the spell. Elemental effects also do secondary damage, i.e.,special effects that the spell has on the immediate environment. Elemental effects only occur with physical spells, as they damage living things and inanimate objects equally. Thus,most spells producing elemental effects have a high DrainCode, as discussed below.

When dealing with secondary effects during play, the gamemaster will have to be selective and make some judgment calls. For example, if a magician casts a fireball spell, the secondary effects of that spell might start fires,cook off ammo, ignite fuel tanks, and set fire to armor and clothing all over the blast zone. An acid elemental effect could have a secondary effect of melting surrounding material into smoking sludge. It is not necessary or desirable to roll for every possible target in such cases. First, determine which important targets the primary damage of the spell affects. Feel free to embellish the effect with descriptive details. Innocent bystanders (living or not) may suffer as often as the runners. For example, if a magician tosses an ice bomb spell into the midst of a charging pack of bikers, the gamemaster should roll to see which bikes skid out of control, but may simply describe passing motorists who have no direct impact on the story hurtling into a 360-degree turn. If the main spell leaves anyone standing and in some way still vulnerable to the side effects of the attack, roll 2D6to determine the spell's secondary effects on any non-living targets of the gamemaster's choosing. The die roll result for secondary effects must be greater than or equal to the target's Object Resistance Rating, p.130, SRII. Increase the Object Resistance Rating by +4against combat spells, as their elemental effects are less pronounced. Against damaging manipulation spells, the target adds the following modifiers to the Object ResistanceRating:

**Spell does: Modifier**

* Light damage No secondary effects
* Moderate damage +4
* Severe damage +2
* Deadly damage None (use base rating)

GAMEMASTER NOTE: Terms such as "blast" or "fire"sometimes appear as part of the description of spells that mayor may not actually involve an elemental effect. Check the description of the spell if the use of such terms is unclear.

**Acid**

Primary Damage: Impact armor (one-half damage,round down), resists the effects of an acid spell, but not ballistic armor. Anyone in full-body armor treated to resist toxic materials (e.g., a firefighter's suit) takes no damage from this spell. Acid creates a cloud of thick, choking fumes that adds +4 to all target numbers for those in the affected area for the rest of the turn (double the actual calculated area of effect to reflect the size of the fume cloud). The affected area is also considered treacherous ground for the rest of the turn.
Secondary Effects: Anything touched by the acid spell may melt into sludge, or at least be badly pitted and burned. Vehicle tires flatten. Both ballistic and impact armor ratings may suffer permanent damage of-1. If the acid attacked at aDeadly level, firearms can be corroded into junk.

**Blast**

Primary Damage: A blast spell affects impact armor (one-half damage, round down), not ballistic armor. Blastspell damage increases its Damage Level against/manifested earth elementals by one level, as it strikes them with an impact of rushing air. A blast spell doing Severedamage would be Deadly to an earth elemental. Characters struck with a blast spell effect are subject to the Knockback and Knockdown rules associated with melee combat (p. 103,SRII), and must substitute the Force hating of the spell for the Strength of the attacker.
Secondary Effects: The usual effects of broken glass,shattered plaster, and so on result from a blast spell. This spell can also badly damage unreinforced walls and structures.

**Fire**

Primary Damage: Characters may resist the primary effects of a fire spell using impact armor (one-half damage,round down). Fire increases its Damage Level by one level against water elementals.
Secondary Effect: A fire spell can, of course, ignite flammable materials. Highly flammable materials (gasoline,dry wood, paper, explosives, and ammunition) add -1 to theirObject Resistance Rating roll to determine secondary effects. If clothing ignites, the wearer takes damage at the end of every turn until the flames are extinguished. The character suffers 6M damage at the end of the first Combat Turn he is on fire. Increase the Power of the damage by +2 per turn thereafter. Treat exploding ammunition, grenades, and such as weapons hit result, with armor doing nothing to reduce the damage. The Combat Pool may be used to help resist the damage while the singed shadowrunner tries to hurl the exploding material away from him. Vehicle fuel may explode, but the vehicle adds +2 to itsObject Resistance Rating for the Secondary Effects Test,unless its fuel is exposed to the open air.

**Ice**

Primary Damage: Use the full value of impact armor (representing warmth of clothing) to resist the effects of anice spell. Anyone wearing heated armor or clothes takes no damage. Ice increases its Damage Level against manifested fire or water elementals by one level. Treat the area affected by an ice spell as difficult and treacherous terrain until the end of the turn.
Secondary Effects: Any affected moving vehicles must immediately make a Crash Test to determine whether they retain control of their vehicle. Their vehicle may also stall. Any liquids in the area of effect may freeze solid. Plants wither and die instantly.

**Lightning**

Primary Damage: Lightning produces heat and impact. Impact armor (one-half damage, round down) resists these effects, and a character in insulated armor or clothing is unaffected. Any character who is not grounded (for example, a levitating magician)is also unaffected. Lightning increases its Damage Level by one level against manifested air elementals, ionizing their form and dispersing their energies.
Secondary Effects: Lightning can short out any electrical or electronic equipment. Modify the equipment's ObjectResistance Rating by -1 against the secondary effects. A lightning spell can destroy metal firearms and touch off their ammo. Vehicle engines may short out, and the fuel be ignited. Against this latter danger, however, vehicles add a +2 modifier when resisting secondary effects damage unless their fuel is exposed to the open air.

**Water**

Primary Damage: Water causes smashing, crushing impact. A water spell does Stun Damage, which impactarmor can resist, but at one-half (round down) its rating. All those affected must make a Strength Test with a target number equal to the Force Rating of the spell, or else be knocked down. Water increases its Damage Level by one level against fire elementals. Exposed electrical wiring is shorted out on contact. Affected areas are treated as treacherous ground for the rest of the turn.
Secondary Effects: Water may short out any electrical or electronic gear such as laser sights, smartgun adapters,and vehicle engines, but not cyberware.

---

### Spell Formulas

Learning a spell from a spell formula is described on p. 132, SRII. However, that section provides no detail about the spell formula itself. This section fills in the gap. A spell formula is the symbolic theory of a spell. To learn a spell, a magician must either have a teacher who knows the spell or a copy of the spell formula. If the teacher knows the spell, then only the spell-learning rules themselves apply. If the magician is attempting to learn the spell from a copy of the spell formula he possesses, without the benefit of a teacher who knows the spell, the procedure is the same as if there were a teacher present but the magician must use a +2 target number modifier for all relevant Success Tests. If the magician needs to design the spell formula himself, use the following rules.

The magical design contained in a spell formula is always the same for a particular spell, but its representation will differ according to the magical tradition. A shamanicformula, for example, might be a medicine item like a painting or carving, a set of runes, or a specially created medicine bag. A hermetic formula would be a written text or perhaps a complex diagram with many arcane equations and symbols. The formulas say the same things about the magical energy for the spell, but they say it in different ways.

**Inspiration**

Before a magician can design a formula, he must have some inspiration. He has to know what he wants the spell to do and have some idea of how it works. A magician can reverse-engineer the formula for a spell that already exists, that is, any spell published in aShadowrun product. It is assumed that such publicly known spells are documented in the Manual of PracticalThaumaturgy or some other magical "tech manual". These reference works do not publish the formulas per se, but instead give practical descriptions of the energies involved and their effects. A magician with such a description as a guide can deduce enough to get an inspiration about a spell's formula. Designing a formula this way is a copyright violation in many jurisdictions, for the law requires that formulas for copyrighted spells be ordered from the publisher or learned from teachers licensed by them. Most street magicians don't care drek about this, of course.

A magician can get the inspiration to design an unpublished spell if he astrally observes another magician casting it. To do this, the observing magician must be astrally perceiving or projecting and he must concentrate all his attention on observing the spell. He cannot move, fight,do magic, provide spell defense, or any other activity. If he fulfills these conditions, he can figure out the spell formula from what he has assensed. In addition, the magician must make an Intelligence Test against the actual Force Rating of the spell being cast. He may add dice to this test equal to hisMagical Theory Skill to help evaluate what he is seeing. If the spell is of Instant duration (see Duration, p. 118), he may add an additional +2 modifier. If the spell is of Sustained orPermanent duration, this modifier does not apply. Only 1 success is needed to gain enough information for inspiration. If a magician designs a brand-new spell, he can design its spell formula without needing any other inspiration. This applies when the player running a magician comes up with a new spell that he wants to add to the game world. Indeed, in this case, the magician must design the formula as part of the inventing process.

**The Design**

Designing a spell formula requires the Magical TheorySkill. Anyone with Magical Theory Skill can do it, even amundane. Theoretical occultists, experts with high ratings inMagical Theory but no Magic Attribute, are rare, but they do exist, much as pure theoreticians exist in the physical sciences. They can create a working spell formula, but not being magically active themselves, can do nothing with it. A shaman must do the design work in a medicine lodge of a rating at least equal to his Magical Theory Skill. A mage or nonmagician needs a magical theory library with a rating at least equal to his Magical Theory Skill. If the Lodge orLibrary Rating is lower than the character's Skill Rating, he uses its rating instead of his own. In this case, the craftsman is only as good as his tools.

Speaking of tools, the following might help the magician designing a spell:

* Mages can receive aid from a single elemental as a service (add a number of dice equal to its Force Rating to the magician's Skill Rating). (See p. 141 of SRII for more information. Use the rules presented under Aid Study for this purpose as well) .
* A library or medicine lodge with a rating higher than the character's Magical Theory Skill raises the effective skill. He gets 1 extra die for every 2 points the library or medicinelodge's rating is above his Magical Theory Skill Rating. That is, a shaman with Magical Theory 5 working in a medicine lodge rated at 7 would have an effective Magical Theory Skill of 6. This also increases the base time for designing the spell by +50 percent.
* Shamans add a number of dice equal to their TotemAdvantage to the roll for any test dealing with spells within their totem. If they are attempting to design a spell which is somehow contrary to their totem, the Totem Advantage dice are subtracted from the total dice to be rolled. See pp. 119 ­22 in SRII for a listing of totems and their advantages/disadvantages.

The test to create the design uses the effective SkillRating in Magical Theory, plus any additional dice gained through the circumstances described above. The magician makes aSuccess Test against a target number equal to twice the intended maximum Force Rating of the spell, minus the magician's Magic Attribute, plus any Drain modifiers acquired during the design of the spell (see the following sections). Remember, the minimum Target Number possible is 2. The base time for the design of the spell is based on the DrainLevel of the spell per the Base Design Time Table.

**Base Design Time Table**

Drain Level Base Time
L 6 days
M 18 days
S 30 days
D 60 days

To determine the actual time required to design the spell,divide the successes earned from the Magical Theory Test into the base time. If the magician generates no successes,the spell design is a failure, and the magician can begin designing another (or the same spell) after waiting a number of days equal to one-half (round down) the base time. Having determined how long the design will take to complete, the character can do it in chunks: a few days here,a week there, until the design is finished. The gamemaster should keep strict track of how much time is being spent to design the spell. The completed formula is in the character's own magical tradition. A mage will produce a hermetic formula, a shaman comes up with a shamanic equation. Translating a formula a character already possesses from one tradition to another adds a +2 modifier to the target number for the Magic TheoryTest. If the inspiration is based on observation, the character adds a +2 modifier. If reverseengineering the formula from some published source, the character modifies the targetnumber by-2. Remember that the lowest target number possible in Shadowrun is a 2.

**Using the Formula**

Once a character has a spell formula, he can use it to learn the spell himself, sell it to customers, publish it, or sell it to a publisher for profit or as "public domain" magic. A spell formula is so complicated that even its designer is unable to memorize it. Obtaining a spell formula requires a hard copy, or access to the spell via electronic media. Mages have an advantage here, because shamanic formulas do not really lend themselves to computer storage. A shaman must usually have the actual formula-object in his possession,though the gamemaster can rule that a digitized image of the object or a hologram fulfills this requirement for strictly visual formulas. The procedure for learning a new spell appears on p. 132 of Shadowrun, Second Edition. A magician can only learn a spell at a Force Rating up to and including the Force Rating for which the spell formula was created. If a magician wants to upgrade a spell formula to a higher Force Rating, the target number for the Spell Design Test is calculated as for a brand-new spell, except that the character adds a -2 modifier to the target number and halves the base time for design.

---

### Inventing New Spells

Rules in this section will help players to design spells not covered in any Shadowrun book. Whether it is a player who has a neat idea his magician wants to try or a gamemaster who needs that special something for a non-player wizard to toss at the player characters, this section covers how to do it. Spell design is an art; it cannot be reduced to pure numbers. These rules are guidelines, at best, giving the player a feel for the scale of spells, their effects, their Drain,and so on. It is not a hardcore, number-crunching system. No rule can take the place of a sense of balance in designing new spells. For instance, a "hurricane" spell, even with 20DDrain, would let the magician off too easily in return for devastating the countryside. Really tremendous magics, like the Ghost Dance that the native tribes used to attack the oldUnited States, are on another scale entirely from the sorcery one person can do. Though the Ghost Dancers of DanielHowling Coyote remain remarkably close-mouthed about how their rituals worked, researchers have determined that magic on this scale took hundreds of participants and thatDrain was measured in the number of magicians who died during the work. Spell design should be an artistic task, not an exercise in mathematical precision allowing a magician to get a tactical nuclear whammy for 3L Drain (no matter what the hermetics might say...). Even some of the spells in theShadowrun rules had to be written on a "that looks good"basis, because it was almost impossible to make the rules a perfect fit. In the last analysis, the gamemaster decides what new spells to allow in his game. Players and the gamemaster should confer closely on new spells to make sure everyone agrees on the power involved. The gamemaster, however, always has the final say in his or her game.

The process of designing a new spell involves several decisions. First, of course, is to decide what the spell does. Next, the designer chooses a purpose that fits that decision. If it heals damage, it is a health spell. If it kills someone, it is a combat spell, and so on. This can be tricky, as discussed below. Now the player decides on a base Drain for the spell, based on the purpose of the spell and the way he wants it to work. Then he decides what modifiers will apply. Lastly, the designed Force Rating is decided. With the numbers now more or less plugged in, the designer writes up the effects in detail. Because the gamemaster has final say on what spells are allowed in his game, he can require the designer to tweak the numbers or the description if he does not approve the original version for some reason. ("Geez, Dave. just what the drek are you doing ...?") .

Once the player has designed the spell in these terms, the character who is inventing the spell has to design the formula for it. If the gamemaster is inventing the spell, the spell simply becomes available, either publicly or known only to the non-player character who invented it.

---

### Defining a Spell

The following sections expand on the spell information provided in the spell directory, p. 151, SRII, appearing in the same order given there.

**Spell Category**

The first step in designing a new spell is to decide the category into which it falls: combat, detection, health, illusion, or manipulation. The rule of thumb that if it hurts, it's a combat spell, if it heals, it's a health spell, and so on, does not apply. What is a spell that shoots a rock into someone at bullet speed? Is it a combat spell or a manipulation spell?  How about a spell that sharpens senses? Is that a detection spell or a health spell?  Sometimes it helps to ask not only what the spell does, but also how it does it. A spell might be something combat-like ("Zap this scum-bucket...") and do it by way of a manipulation ("...by zinging this .40 caliber fetish into him!").

**Spell Type**

Spells can be one of two types, **mana** or **physical**. Mana spells only affect living things or magical energies (like spell energy) in non-living things. Physical spells affect any material, but increase the Drain target number of the spell, as explained in Factoring the Drain Code, p. 118. It is easier on the spellcaster to throw mana spells. A mana spell is useless, however, when the target is not a living being. A manatype illusion will fool the guards in person, but doesn't do diddly if they are watching the caster via closed-circuit video. Mana illusion spells affect the target and alter its perception. A physical illusion spell twists and sidesteps physical laws to create a real effect. Another interesting difference between the two types of illusions is that a physical illusion spell can be seen by people other than the target, and they know it to be an illusion (unless they are within the spell's area of effect, in which case normal rules apply). A mana illusion spell is only visible to those affected by it.

The line between mana and physical spells is not always so clear-cut. Players often ask why certain mana­type health spells work on heavily cybered charac- ters. The answer is that cyberware, bought and paid for with Essence, is bound so tightly to the organic part of the user that magic can usually be just as effective against a vat-jobstreet samurai as against a pure-flesh fanatic tribesman. So, within these rules, cybernetic senseenhancing systems that were paid for with Essence are considered to be natural and can be affected by mana-type spells. (For example, characters with cybereyes can be affected by mana illusion spells) . This does not hold true for a rigger using a vehicle's sensors. Because the sensors are separate and distinct from the rigger (no Essence paid for access to the electronic advantages) a mana-type spell is useless against those systems. If the rigger himself is within view of the magician, however, then the spell can be cast directly on the person, and a mana illusion spell would have an effect. (Yet another good reason to stay hidden or buttoned down) . Human thoughts, feelings, and so on can never be considered cyber-modified, no matter how much headware a character carries. The brain may be so full of wire that a character picks up radio broadcasts, but the mind is pure life force, and thus on the same "wavelength" as mana magic.

---

**Base Target Number Table**

Spell Type/Condition Base Target Number
Mana spell Target's Willpower Attribute Rating
Physical spell Target's Body Attribute Rating
Physical illusion spell Intelligence
Manipulation spell 4
Creating a barrier 6
Fine manipulation 6
Spell is:
Affecting inanimate object Determine composition, see Object Resistance Table, p. 130, SRII
General (i.e., area-effect detection spell) 4
Counteracting specific effects (disease, toxin) Equal to Power Rating, Strength Attribute, or equivalent for that effect
Affecting magic Sorcery Skill Rating of caster
Benefiting an Attribute 2 x Attribute
Affecting Attribute adversely 10 - target's Essence Rating
Affecting target's bodily functions, (adversely or beneficially) 10 - target's Essence Rating

**Range**

Within this spell design system, the range of the spell affects the Drain Code. The designer can decide on a range at this time, but that decision does not take effect until theFactoring the Drain Code step described on p. 118. The possible range choices are:

* **No Range/Touch Required:** The magician must "touch"the target in order to affect it. This does not require physical,flesh-to flesh contact, but refers to aural contact. The casting magician must move his or her own aura into contact with the aura of the target. In many ways, this type of spell is very difficult to defend against because the magician need not actually touch the target, but simply get close. To make aural contact, resolve a Melee Combat Test (see p. 100, SRII), but modify the attacker's target number by -1 because he does not have to actually hit the target. The use of a TouchRequired spell cannot be combined with a damage-causing unarmed attack. Resolve Surprise (see p. 86, SRII) if needed. No test needs to be made to make aural contact with an unconscious or willing target. Regardless of whether or no contact is made, the casting magician must make a DrainResistance Test.
* **Limited Range:** The spell can be cast at a distance up to a limited range. The actual range limitation varies with the spell being cast. At the time the spell is cast, the magician makes a separate Force Test against a Target Number of 4,adding any applicable injury modifiers. If the magician desires, he or she may augment the test with dice from his or her Magic Pool. These dice, however, must be available in addition to any dice allocated for the actual Spell SuccessTest. Multiply the number of successes from this Force Test by the magician's Magic Rating to get the maximum range in meters at which the spell can operate. Usually only detection spells are created with the limited-range restriction. (Hey,how'd you like to be banking on that power bolt spell to save your character's butt and blow the Force Test so it only has a range of six meters?) . Detection spells tend to be centered on the caster, so the actual casting distance allowed becomes unimportant.
* **Line-of-Sight (LOS):** If the magician can see the target,up to the limits of his or her own vision, the spell can reach the target. See the Range Modifiers (Optional Rule), p. 111,for an expansion of the line-of-sight and magical targetingrules.

**Target Number**

The spell type and other specific conditions of the spell determine the base target number for the Spell SuccessTest, per the descriptions below. This information also appears in the Base Target Number Table for easy reference.

* If the spell is a mana spell, the base target number is theWillpower Attribute Rating of the target.
* If the spell is physical, the base target number is the BodyAttribute Rating of the target.
* If the spell is affecting an inanimate object, find the target number by determining the composition of the object and consulting the Object Resistance Table, p. 130, SRII.
* If the spell is general and not specific to a single target,such as the area-effect detection spells, use Target Number 4.
* If the spell is being used to counteract the effects of something specific, such as a disease or toxin, the target number is equal to the Power Rating, Strength Attribute, or equivalent for that specific effect.
* If the spell affects magic, then the target number is equal to the Sorcery Skill Rating of the magician who cast the spell.
* If the spell is affecting an Attribute beneficially, the target number is equal to twice the Attribute.
* If the Attribute is being affected adversely, the target number is equal to 10 minus the target's Essence. This is also the target for spells that affect the inner workings of the body,beneficially or adversely, in an attempt to alter it from its current condition or status quo.
* If the spell is a physical illusion spell, the target number is based on Intelligence.
* If the spell is a manipulation spell, use Target Number 4 unless that spell involves the creation of a barrier, in which case use Target Number 6. Additionally, if the spell requires fine manipulation the Target Number is 6.

**Duration**

Shadowrun spells may last for one of three durations,Instant, Sustained, or Permanent (see p. 128, SRII). Instant spells take effect and end in the action during which they are cast. They usually have some permanent effect on reality, but the spell itself only lasts an instant. Spells that create damaging energies are of this type. Sustained spells last only as long as the caster maintains them, and their effects usually end when the spell does. Most noncombat spells fall into this category. Combat spells and damaging manipulation spells, those that channel and focus significant amounts of lethal energy in a split second, cannot be sustained. A spell that creates a damaging barrier or trap, on the other hand, can be ofSustained duration because the release of that energy does not coincide with the casting of the spell. Any spell involving sensing, searching, analysis,defense, transformation, or other changes in the world or the way the target of the spell perceives the world, should beSustained spells. The only way such a spell can become permanent is by using Quickening (see Metamagic, p. 42) or a spell lock (see p. 138, SRII). Permanent spells must be sustained for a time, but when that specified period is over, the effects are lasting. Most healing magics are of this type. Only a few spells should be inherently permanent induration. Spells that heal or repair damage, disease,insanity, the effects of drugs, poisons, and so on are good candidates. They return the target to its natural state, so that the universe will maintain the change once it is established. Minor organic transformations that purify or even create natural compounds from organic sources can also safely become Permanent, for example, a spell that creates simple foodstuff. Physical cosmetic spells for creating make-up, a hairdo,new clothes, even to rearrange the superficial appearance of objects, can be either Sustained or Permanent. This is the basis of the highly profitable use of magic as a status symbol for appearance. As a general rule, if the spell produces some sort of game effect or provides a bonus (other than restorative), the effect should not be Permanent. The gamemaster has the final word on whether it is possible to create a permanent version of a spell in his game. Further, if he approves a spell that turns out to be too powerful, the creator should graciously accept any gamemaster decision to downgrade the spell to Sustained,or even Instant, duration. The base time to maintain a spell to make it of Permanent duration depends on the complexity of the change the spell makes in the world. An example of how this applies to health spells is given on p. 155 of the Shadowrun rules. If the spell is not sustained for the entire period indicates it does not become permanent and its effect is lost. The base time scale for effecting a Permanent spell is:

Minor Change 5 turns
Moderate Change 10 turns
Serious Change 15 turns
Drastic Change 20 turns

To determine the actual time required to make a spell permanent, the magician can divide the base time for creating the spell by the number of successes generated in the Spell Success Test when he cast the spell. The magician must decide before casting the spell whether those successes will be used to reduce the base time or to improve the effect of the spell. They cannot do both. The Drain Code for Permanent spells is increased perFactoring the Drain Code.

**Force**

To determine the Force Rating of the spell he or she is creating, the magician simply decides on the maximumForce of the formula. A spell's Force Rating cannot be greater than his or her own Magical Theory Skill Rating, or the rating of the library or medicine lodge he is working with.

**Spell Resistance Test**

Spells that affect a character adversely, i.e., in a way that operates against that character's purposes and would impose an effect that would be actively opposed if the target knew of the spell, must be resisted. In other words, if a spell works against the target, the target will resist the spell. The target of the spell resists the spell (with a SpellResistance Test) using as its target number the Force Rating of the spell. The Attribute affected by the spell determines the number of dice rolled in the test.

---

**Factoring The Drain Code**

Having decided on a spell's purpose, the player must determine its basic Drain. This varies according to the specifics of each spell. Two things must be determined for the Drain Code: the Drain Target and the Drain Level. The base Drain Target, the target number of the caster's DrainResistance Test, is always equal to one-half the ForceRating of the spell, rounded down. This should be noted as (F / 2), as the actual Force Rating at which the spell is cast may vary. Drain target number modifiers may also apply that will either raise or lower the Drain Target. (For a complete list of Drain modifiers and explanations of each, see DrainModifiers, p. 122) . The Drain Level is based on the nature of the spell, andDrain Level modifiers adjust the Drain Level up or down as appropriate. Special Note: If the Drain Level reaches (D)eadly, and additional Drain Level modifiers remain to be applied, theDrain Target is increased by +2 for each unused Drain Level modifier. Also, if modifiers added to the Drain Level will reduce the level below (L)ight, it remains at (L)ight. Drain Target and Drain Level modifiers are explained in detail on pp. 122-123, following.

**Combat Spells:** As shown in the Combat Spell Drain LevelTable, the Damage Level of a combat spell determines theDrain Level. The Drain Level is also modified by the conditions in the Drain Modifiers Table.

**Combat Spell Drain Table**

Damage Level Base Drain Level
L L
M M
S S
D D

---

**Drain Modifiers**

Condition Modifier

**Drain Target Modifiers:**
Physical Spell +1 Drain Target
Stun Damage -1 Drain Target
Restricted Target -1 Drain Target
Touch Required -1 Drain Target*

**Drain Level Modifiers:**
Area-Effect Spell +1 Drain Level
Elemental Effect +1 Drain Level
Limited Range -1 Drain Level
Touch Required -1 Drain Level*
Very Restricted Target -1 Drain Level
Bonus Game Effect See Drain Modifiers
LOS Range No modifier

*Apply both modifiers.

GAMEMASTER NOTE: Combat spells by their nature ignore armor of all kinds. The ram spell (technically misnamed) affects the vehicle by "cooking" its structure from the inside. (Remember, combat-spell magic grounds into a target from astral space, effectively hitting it from inside) . Because of the special game system used to resolve the effects of physical barriers (necessary to make standard physical combat run smoothly) the designers found it necessary to create the somewhat, well, odd, game system behind the ram spell. In general, gamemasters should be prepared to create other specialized resolution systems as circumstances demand. Such specialized systems are difficult to balance from game to game, so nothing should ever be written in stone. The gamemaster must always reserve the right to go back and retrofit something that isn't working properly. For more on The Craft of Spell Design, see p. 124.

**Detection Spells:** The base Drain Level for a detection spell depends on what is being detected and how much information the spell gathers. (See Detection Spell Drain andDrain Modifiers tables) . Detecting non-living things is tougher than working with living subjects. Spells can simply detect presence. Is the target of the spell there or not?  For example, a detect life spell simply detects the presence of living beings. Spells can also analyze the target, providing the spellcaster with information. For example, the spell detect enemies reveals the general intentions of a living being. As a design, this spell stretches the limits of the spell structure at that Drain Level. Detection spells can provide a caster or target with hypersenses. Hypersense involves the senses at a level that could in no way be considered natural by imparting information that would normally be unknowable to the caster. Hypersenses can allow the target to achieve and acquire benefits on a subconscious level. An example of this kind of hypersense spell is the combat-sense spell, which does not give the recipient any conscious, accessible information concerning the situation, but the target is able to react (through the Combat Pool bonus) to information that he or she somehow instinctively knows. Detection spells can be designed at any range but LOS (LOS range would provide too much information), thoughTouch Required range may make sense for certain types of detection spells.

---

**Detection Spell Drain Table**

Spell Nature Base Drain Level
Detect living beings or magical energy M
Analyze living beings or magical energy S
Sensory enhancement (improves physical sense) M
Radically new or enhanced physical sense (ESP, Superbalance, and so on) D

**Drain Modifiers**

Condition Modifier

**Drain Target Modifiers:**
Deep Mind Interaction +2 Drain Target*
Physical Spell +1 Drain Target
Superficial Mind Interaction +1 Drain Target
Sustained Spell +1 Drain Target
Works on Non-Living Target +1 Drain Target*
Detection Spell Modifier -1 Drain Target
Extended Range -1 Drain Target
Restricted Target -1 Drain Target
Specific Target -1 Drain Target
Touch Required -1 Drain Target*

**Drain Level Modifiers:**
Area-Effect Spell +1 Drain Level
Deep Mind Interaction +1 Drain Level*
Works on Non-Living Target +1 Drain Level*
Limited Range -1 Drain Level
Personal Spell -3 Drain Levels
Touch Required -1 Drain Level*
Very Restricted Target -1 Drain Level
Voluntary Subject Required -1 Drain Level
Bonus Game Effect See Drain Modifiers

*Apply both Target and Drain modifiers.

**Health Spells:** Health spells are difficult to quantify because the caster must keep track of so many variables. Spells designed to counter the effects of an agent (or the agent directly) such as disease, poison, and so on are limited to a maximum Damage Level that they can treat successfully. A spell that counters a toxin causing Lightdamage is no help against a toxin causing Moderate damage. The base Drain Level for this type of spell is equal to the maximum Damage Level the spell can affect. Spells that cause afflictions have a Drain Level equal to the level of the affliction to the target, i.e., a spell that causesSerious disease has a Serious Drain Level. Spells that affect Attributes, either negatively or positively, have a base Drain Level depending on the number of Attribute Points added or subtracted, per theAttribute Base Drain Table. Unless otherwise indicated, a health spell has a baseDrain Level of (L)ight.

---

**Attribute Base Drain Table**

Ratings Point Change Base Drain Level
+/ -1 L
+/ -2 M
+/ -3 S
+/ -4 D

**Drain Modifiers**

Condition Modifier
**Drain Target Modifier:**
Spell Affects Cybered Attribute +2 Drain Target
Physical Spell +1 Drain Target
Sustained Spell +1 Drain Target
Treats Symptoms Only -2 Drain Target
Restricted Target -1 Drain Target
Touch Required -1 Drain Target*

**Drain Level Modifiers:**
Permanent Effect +1 Drain Level
Spell Affects Attributes +1 Drain Level
Spell Affects Initiative +1 Drain Level
Limited Range -1 Drain Level
Touch Required -1 Drain Level*
Very Restricted Target -1 Drain Level
Voluntary Subject Required -1 Drain Level
Bonus Game Effect See Drain Modifiers
LOS Range No modifier

*Apply both modifiers.

**Illusion Spells:** The base Drain for illusion spells depends on the senses affected by the illusion and its overall believability, as shown in the Illusion Base Drain Table.

---

**Illusion Base Drain Table**

Type of Illusion Base Drain Level
Obvious or Simple Illusion L
Realistic or Complex Illusion M
Very Realistic or Very Complex Illusion S

**Drain Modifiers**

Condition Modifier
**Drain Target Modifier:**
Physical Spell +1 Drain Target
Sustained Spell +1 Drain Target
Restricted Target -1 Drain Target
Touch Required -1 Drain Target*

**Drain Level Modifiers:**
Area-Effect Spell +1 Drain Level
Illusion Spell Modifier -1 Drain Level
Limited Range -1 Drain Level
Touch Required -1 Drain Level*
Very Restricted Target -1 Drain Level
Voluntary Subject Required -1 Drain Level
Bonus Game Effect See Drain Modifiers
LOS Range No modifier

*Apply both modifiers.

**Manipulation Spells:** Base Drain for a manipulation spell depends on an arbitrary measurement of the overall change in reality that the spell creates. The gamemaster is the final arbiter in settling any disputes over this number. The Manipulation Effect Damage Table provides general guidelines for determining how to quantify the change. The base Drain Level for damaging manipulations is derived from the base Damage Level of the spell, just as for combat spells. Note that a damaging manipulation spell that however re­motely involves an elemental effect (see Elemental Effects,p. 112) must also modify Drain using the Elemental EffectModifiers Table.

---

**Manipulation Effect Damage Table**

Spell Damage Effect Level
Minor Mental Changes (heighten emotion, suggestion) L
Major Mental Changes (mind control, amnesia) M
Minor Physical Changes (appearance) M
Major Physical Changes (change shape or form) S
Minor Physical Control or Manipulation M
Major Physical Control or Manipulation S
Minor Environmental Changes (light, darkness, humidity) S
Major Environmental Changes (weather, destruction, gravity) D

**Manipulation Base Drain Table**

Damage Level Base Drain Level
L L
M M
S S
D D

**Elemental Effect Modifiers**

Condition Modifier

**Drain Target Modifier:**
Deep Mind Interaction +2 Drain Target
Physical Spell +1 Drain Target
Superficial Mind Interaction +1 Drain Target
Sustained Spell +1 Drain Target
Stun Damage -1 Drain Target
Touch Required -1 Drain Target*

**Drain Level Modifiers:**
Area-Effect Spell +1 Drain Level
Damaging Manipulation Is Sustained +1 Drain Level
Deep Mind Interaction +1 Drain Level
Elemental Effect +1 Drain Level
Permanent Effect** +1 Drain Level
Spell Affects Attribute +1 Drain Level
Touch Required +1 Drain Level*
Limited Range -1 Drain Level
Bonus Game Effect See Drain Modifiers
LOS Range No modifier

*Apply both modifiers.
**For minor, inconsequential transformations only.

---

**Resisted Manipulation Spells:** The target of a manipulation spell that forces a change in shape, form, or behavior must resist the spell. If the manipulation is of a mental nature, involving thoughts or emotions, the target resists using Willpower. If the manipulation is of a physical nature, the target resists with the Body Attribute. If the spellcaster generates the same number of successes or more successes than the target, the spell succeeds. The effect of certain spells may then be calculated from the netsuccesses.

---

**Drain Modifiers**

Drain modifiers can affect either the Drain Target (based on one-half the Force Rating of the spell, rounded down) or the Drain Level (set by the specifics of the spell design). Detailed explanations of each modifier follows the DrainModifiers Master List in alphabetical order.

**Master List Key**

C = Combat Spell
D = Detection Spell
H = Health Spell
I = Illusion Spell
M = Manipulation Spell

**Bonus Game Effect (Variable):** Casting certain spells results in the need to add special effects (game mechanics,as opposed to other components of spell design and execution) to a situation. For example, these game effects may include creating target number modifiers, variable success-based tests, adding dice to a roll, and so on. These effects are grouped into a catchall modifier called the bonusgame effect. The examples listed below provide Drain Target and Drain Level modifiers for a variety of possible game effects. Gamemasters should feel free to create new effects as players use spells requiring specialized effects. The Bonus Game Effect modifier usually requires the greatest amount of game-balance fudging on the part of the designer and the gamemaster. If the effect of the spell is actually inconsequential, then adjust the modifier accordingly.

**Drain Target / Drain Level Game Effect Modifier**

* Creates Specific Test (i.e., Perception) Target Number
    * At 2 x successes +2
    * At 1 x successes +1
* Creates Variable General Target Number Modifier
    * At 1 per success +2
    * At 1 per 2 successes +1
* Provides Set General Target Number Modifier
    * +1 +1
    * +2 +1
* Adds Additional Dice (to Attribute, etc.)
    * Per die given +1
    * 1 per 2 successes +1
* Forces Target to Make Test (i.e., Quickness to avoid slipping)
    * Against Target Number of 4 +1
    * Against Target Number of 1 per 2 successes +1
* Discretionary Effect (gamemaster determined)
    * Simple/Inconsequential +1
    * Involved/Complex +1
    * Very Involved/Very Complex +2 or more

**Damaging Manipulation Is Sustained (+1 Drain Level):** A magician casting a damaging manipulation spell ofSustained duration must add this modifier and so suffers an additional +1 Drain Level.

**Deep Mind Interaction (+2 Drain Target / +1 Drain Level):** The spellcaster must add this detection and manipulation spell modifier to his or her target number for the SpellSuccess Test if the spell being constructed requires deep,multilayered interaction with the target's mind, particularly if controlling or reading thoughts. For controlling or reading emotions and surface intentions, use the Superficial Mind Interaction modifier.

**Detection Spell Modifier (-1 Drain Target):** This detection spell modifier reflects that certain elements of detection spells make them easier to cast than other spells.

**Elemental Effect (+1 Drain Level):** A spellcaster throwing a combat or manipulation spell that creates an elemental effect (see Elemental Effects, p. 112) must use this modifier. Only physical spells can result in an elemental effect.

**Extended Range (-1 Drain Target):** This detection spellmodifier increases the effective range at which the spell can operate. The same separate Force Success Test used for limited range should be made, and the successes from that test multiplied by a number equal to ten times the magician's Magic Attribute Rating. This modifier applies only to detection spells. See Detection Spells, p. 1 11, for more information.

**Illusion Spell Modifier (-1 Drain Level):** Use this modifier to reflect the fact that illusion spells are easier to cast than other spells.

**Limited Range (-1 Drain Level):** Use this modifier when casting spells at limited range (see Range, p. 117).

**LOS Range (No modifier):** Spells created with line-of­sight range do not use Drain Level/Drain Target modifiers. Remember, detection spells cannot be designed with line-of­sight range.

**Permanent Effect (+1 Drain Level):** In order to cast a sustained spell and make it permanent, the spellcaster must use this modifier. See Duration, p. 118 for more information.

**Personal Spell (-3 Drain Levels):** A spellcaster casting a spell on himself receives this benefit. A magician is always "touching" himself (his aura), and so the Touch Required modifier does not apply. Nor does the Voluntary SubjectRequired modifier apply the magician presumably wants to cast the spell on himself.

**Physical Spell (+1 Drain Target):** Any physical spell in any category requires this modifier. In cases where the spellunder design could sensibly be classified either physical or mana, the player should use the Physical Spell modifier, for example, spells that affect the Reaction Attribute.

**Restricted Target (-1 Drain Target):** If a spell only affects a limited class of target, add the Restricted Target modifier to the spellcaster's target number for the Spell Success Test. Examples include a spell designed to affect a single species (e.g., manaball vs. elves), a physical spell that only affects non-living things (e.g., the ram spell), and so on. This modifier is not cumulative with the Very Restricted Target modifier described below. This modifier cannot be used with manipulation spells.

**Specific Target (-1 Drain Target):** This detection-spellmodifier applies when a single subject is the target of a detection spell.

**Spell Affects Attribute (+1 Drain Level):** If a health or manipulation spell affects an Attribute, the spellcaster must use this modifier. Health spells (but not manipulation spells)that affect Reaction also require the Spell Affects Initiativemodifier, described below.

**Spell Affects Cybered Attribute (+2 Drain Target):** Due to the complex, resistant nature of cyberware, any healthspell (and only health spells) that affects an Attribute already affected by cyberware requires this modifier. Though certain manipulation spells affect Attributes, they do not boost theAttribute directly, but produce an effect that provides a bonus or increase to the Attribute Rating. For example, see the armor spell, p. 158, SRII.

**Spell Affects Initiative (+1 Drain Level):** This health spellmodifier should be used when a spell affects Initiative by increasing or decreasing the available number of Reaction orInitiative dice. This modifier is cumulative with the SpellAffects Attribute modifier.

**Stun Damage (-1 Drain Target):** Damaging spells that do Stun damage, either combat or damaging manipulation spells, receive this modifier.

**Superficial Mind Interaction (+1 Drain Target):** Thisdetection and manipulation spell modifier must be used if thespell being constructed interacts on a superficial level with a target's mind. It is used primarily when attempting to affect emotions or general intentions. No specific information can be gained or imposed using this modifier. Deeper interaction with the mind requires the Deep Mind Interaction modifier.

**Sustained Spell (+1 Drain Target):** Spells of Sustained duration require this modifier.

**Touch Required (-1 Drain Target / -1 Drain Level):** This modifier is used when casting a spell requires direct contact with the target. See Range, p. 117 for resolution information. This modifier is not cumulative with the Personal Spellmodifier. If the spellcaster is using the Voluntary SubjectRequired modifier, add only the-1 Drain Target modifier for the Touch Required aspect of the spell. Normally, however,apply both the -1 Drain Target and the -1 Drain Levelmodifiers.

**Treats Only Symptoms (-2 Drain Target):** Any health spell that treats or causes only symptoms, not the underlying causes, uses this modifier. In other words, the spell cannot actually affect Attribute Ratings, heal boxes of damage, and so on.

**Very Restricted Target (-1 Drain Level):** This modifier applies to spells that affect only a specific type of target. For example, a physical spell designed only to blow open doors and which is ineffective against other inanimate objects would be treated as a very restricted spell. The only way to develop a spell that could use this bonus and affect ' living things' is to designate a specific individual as the target. ("Here's a spell with your name on it. No, really!") . This modifier cannot be used with manipulation spells.

**Voluntary Subject Required (-1 Drain Level):** This modifier affects spells that only work on a voluntary target. The target must know that the spell is being used on him and must accept the magic willingly. The magician must still make a Success Test against the usual target numbers, but the target does riot make a Resistance Test, and so all the magician's successes apply to the spell's effects. This modifier is only partially cumulative with the Touch Required modifier above.

**Works On Non-Living Target (+1 Drain Target / +2 Drain Level):** This detection spell modifier is required if the spellcaster desires information on a non-living target. It is required for all detection spells affecting objects or devices. This modifier is not required for any category of spells other than detection. When using this modifier, apply both the +1Drain Target modifier and the +2 Drain Level modifier.

---

**Examples of Spell Design**

Let's pick a few of these goodies and look at how we arrived at the Drain Codes, applying the rules for FactoringThe Drain Code on pp. 118-121. These examples of how published spells were generated can be helpful to players crafting their own. First, though, a few more thoughts on spelldesign. Happy zapping.

---

**The Craft of Spell Design**
(or, A Look Behind The Curtain)

We've already spent a few paragraphs talking about how spell design is an art, and not an exercise in numbercrunching. Well, that is still true, but as soon as the process involves a game system, it becomes more of a craft; a combination of art and technical expertise. The Shadowrun spell-design system is a loose one. Like many of Shadowrun's game systems, the spell-design system does not model any one particular view of reality, but instead creates and fosters an atmosphere that contributes tothe roleplaying experience. This game system was never intended to be a static, immutable entity, but unscrupulous players will try to abuse the system. Because it sometimes seems that the systems specifically designed to resist abuse breed it the most, we figured, why bother?  Instead, we'vesimply created a spell-design system that includes enough built-in stopgaps to restrict runaway power design, but provides enough flexibility to allow the players and gamemasters to create the spells they want. The ultimate goal of a spell design, from a systemic point of view, is balance. The spell must do what it was designed to do, do it in a worthwhile manner, and be balanced within the game. The last part is the hardest.

A percentage of the spells in the basic Shadowrun rules,and in this book, break away from the design system and work in ways not built into the system. The reason? The spells were better, and more fun, that way. The spell-design rules should not keep gamemasters and players from creating a spell for a specific effect, or resolving that effect in a manner not presented in the spell-design system. The guidelines for creating spells like ram, heal (or treat),hibernate, shadow, and others do not appear in the rules,but these spells exist. The flexible Shadowrun spell-design system allows players to find solutions to problems unsolvable under other systems. The problem of gamebalance, however, remains. Spell designers must always keep balance in mind. Sure, it's fun to build a spell that always kicks butt, everytime, without fail, but it's not fair. It's not fair to the other players, and it's not fair to the gamemaster. The gamemaster is the final and absolute arbiter of what is fair in his or her game. If the gamemaster says a spell is too powerful, the designer has to fix it or it won't be in the game. That's it, end of story. Even we, the awesomely omniscient (and humble) game designers will not overrule a gamemaster if he or she thinks a spell is too powerful for their game. Even if that spell was designed by the book, right down the line. Remember, balance is the key: without balance, the game will not be much fun, and fun is the name of the game.

---

**Combat Spells**

The mana bolt spell, the magician's standby, is a straightforward, face-stomping combat spell. The magician chooses a Damage Level of (S)erious, so that makes theBase Drain Level (S)erious as well. Because no other modifiers apply, the Drain Code is (F= 2)S. Easy stuff.

Its counterpart, the power bolt spell, also has a DamageLevel of (S)erious, so again the Base Drain Level is (S)erious. This is a Physical Spell, which requires a DrainTarget Modifier of +1, giving the power bolt spell a DrainCode of: [(F/2)+1]S. A bit further down the list of combat spells is powerblast, with a Damage Level of (M)oderate. Its Base DrainLevel is (M)oderate. Because it is a Physical Spell, add a +1Drain Target Modifier. Add another +1 modifier because it is an Area-Effect Spell. The Elemental Effect of blast gives the spell another +1 Drain Level Modifier, for a final Drain Code of: [(F-2)+1]D.

---

**Detection Spells**

We chose a few detection spells at random to explain. The detect enemies spell must detect living things and analyze their mental state and/or actions, which makes itsBase Drain Level S. Limited Range modifies the Drain Level by -1, and it is Sustained, modifying the Drain Target by +1. As a Detection Spell it automatically gets a -1 Drain Targetmodifier, but add in a +1 Drain Target modifier for SuperficialMind Interaction. It is an Area-Effect Spell, and so the DrainLevel is again increased by +1. Finally, the fact that it is cast on a Voluntary Subject modifies the Drain Level by -1. The final result: [(F/2)+1]M. Players must keep in mind that spells to analyze a specific matter or to dig out specific information are considered as cast against the thing or person being analyzed, and so must overcome the target's resistance, for example, the analyze device and mind probe spells. General detection spells and hypersenses, on the other hand, are considered as cast with the target's acceptance. This sometimes requires the gamemaster to make a judgment call.

The mind probe spell warrants a special note. Due to the potentially unbalancing game effect of such a spell, we devised a unique game system to create it. The Drain Code was judged severe enough after standard calculations that it was left unaltered. As a radically new sense it began with aBase Drain Level of (D)eadly. The applicable modifiers were:
* Touch Required (-1 Drain Target / -1 Drain Level)
* Sustained (+1 Drain Target)
* Detection Spell (-1 Drain Target)
* Specific Spell (-1 Drain Target)
* Involves the Mind Deeply (+2 Drain Target / +1 Drain Level)
* Bonus Game Effect (+1 Drain Level)

This all results in a final Drain Code of [(F/2)+2]D.

---

**Health Spells**

Please note that most health-spell formulas adhere rigidly to the rule limiting effective treatment to the "golden" hour following an injury, and to other special-case rules that make health spells expensive. This was an attempt to keep the game balanced, so that wounds from combat do not become so trivial a factor in Shadowrun that a powerful healer can patch up a samurai with the snap of his fingers. Because the increase-and decrease-attribute spells were problematic, the basic rules arbitrarily assigned themBase Drain Levels based on the level of increase or decrease: L for +1, M for +2, and so on. For example, the spell decrease (cybered Attribute) -1 had a base Drain Level of L. The applicable Drain Target modifiers are +2 for Affecting a Cybered Attribute, +1 because it is a Physical Spell, and +1 because it is Sustained. The applicable Drain Level modifier is /1 for Spell Affects Attributes. In addition, TouchRequired applies a-1 Drain Target modifier and a -1 DrainLevel modifier. The final result is: [(F/2)+3]L.

A new spell in this book, resist pain, had a base DrainLevel similar to a healing spell, reflecting the level of damage being affected. So, the resist light pain spell has a (L)ightbase Damage Level. The only modifiers are PermanentEffect (+1 Drain Level), Limited Range (-1 Drain Level), andBonus Game Effect (+1 Drain Level), resulting in a DrainCode of: (F/2)M. Common sense limited the permanency of relief provided by resist pain spells, and limited-length relief applied limits to the way the spells worked. The general rule of thumb said that a spell would only affect damage of the same level, i.e., a Moderate spell would not help alleviateSevere damage. The spell oxygenate had an interesting development. Because this spell does not deal with healing (or hurting), it received the flat (L)ight base Drain Level. Because it affects the blood directly, it is a Physical Spell (+1 Drain Target), and it is Sustained (+1 Drain Target). It Affects the BodyAttributes (+1 Drain Level), has a Limited Range (-1 DrainLevel), and a Bonus Game Effect of 1 extra die per 2successes (/1 Drain Level). The net result: [(F/2)+2]M.

---

**Illusion Spells**

The illusion spells are fairly straightforward. Chaos, for example, is a realistic illusion affecting multiple senses, so its Base Drain Level is M. It is a Physical Spell, as it can affect sensing devices, so add a Drain Target Modifier of +1. Sustained duration gives it another +1 Drain Target Modifier,and the Illusion Spell and Bonus Game Effect modifiers add -1 and +1 Drain Level modifiers, which cancel each other out. Final result: [(F / 2)+2]M. The chaotic world spell is an Area-Effect version of the chaos spell, so its Drain Level is modified by an additional +1, for a Drain Code of: [(F/2)+2]S. The Drain drops rapidly for the more marketable illusionspells, where the Voluntary Subject, Touch Required, and other modifiers reduce the wear and tear on the caster.

---

**Manipulation Spells**

The hardest part of defining a manipulation spell is deciding what level of change the manipulation imposes on the target (or the environment). The barrier spells were interpreted as minor physical manipulations, and so given base Drain Level of (M)oderate, modified by Area Effect, the Physical nature of some of the spells, and the Bonus Game Effects. The physical barrier spell, for example, has a base DrainCode of M (minor physical manipulation), modified by +1Drain Level for being an Area-Effect Spell, -1 Drain Level forLimited Range, and +1 Drain Level for Bonus Game Effect. It also receives a +1 Drain Target modifier as a Physical Spell and +1 Drain Target modifier for Sustained duration, giving it a final Drain Code of [(F/2)+2]S. The mana barrier spell is modified the same way, except as a mana spell it receives one less Drain Target modifier, and so its final Drain Code is:[(F/ 2) + 1 ]S. The anti-bullet and anti-spell versions of the barrier-spells have lower Drain Codes because they use theRestricted Target modifier. The damaging manipulations are also quite straightforward, calculated in much the same way as combatspells.

---

**Spell Directory**

The spell directory provides explanations and mechanics for new and revised spells created using the system described in Spell Design, pp. 110-123, plus a little imagination. The spells are organized according to type: combat, detection,health, illusion, and manipulation. This directory is not intended to serve as an exhaustive list of all the known spells in the Shadowrun universe: players and gamemasters are encouraged to create their own spells, and have fun doing it. Note that the spells listed in Shadowrun, Second Edition,do not appear here, though they are included on the MasterSpell Table, pp. 133-135. Previously published spells appear here only if they require further explanation under the rules published in this book. Each spell listing is accompanied by the following notations:

* **Type** tells the type of spell, whether physical or mana.
* **Range** tells the range: Touch Required, Limited, or Line­ofSight (LOS).
* **Target** indicates how to calculate the target number for the Spell Success Test. A notation of (R) means that the spell is Resisted and so the target will roll dice to reduce the casting magician's successes. If no (R) is present, only the casting magician rolls dice.
* **Damage** indicates the base Damage Level; Light,Moderate, Serious, or Deadly, as well as whether or not the spell does Stun damage.
* **Duration** tells whether the spell has Instant, Sustained, orPermanent duration. If Permanent duration has an extranotation, such as "Permanent (10 Turns)," that indicates the number of turns the spell must be sustained before it actually becomes permanent.
* **Drain** indicates the Drain Code of the spell. The (F / 2) or [(F / 2)+X] notation indicates that the Drain Resistance Test is made against one-half the Force Rating of the spell (rounddown), or one-half the Force plus some number. The second notation indicates whether the Drain Level is Light, Moderate,Serious, or Deadly.

---

**Combat Spells**

The following combat spells are new. Players and gamemasters should feel free to add their own spells to this list.

**Death Touch**
A particularly lethal combat spell that requires the casting magician to touch the target. The spell causes Physical damage to a single target.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Touch
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** D
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-1]S

**Fire Bolt**
A powerful bolt of energy that causes Physical damage to a single target, using the elemental effect of fire.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D

**Fire Cloud**
An area-effect cloud of magical energy that causes Physical damage, using the elemental effect of fire.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D

**Fire Dart**
An energy dart that causes Physical damage to a single target, using the elemental effect of fire.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** L
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]M

**Fire Missile**
A bolt of magical energy that causes Physical damage to a single target using the elemental effect of fire.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]S

**Fireball**
An area-effect spell that causes Physical damage using the elemental effect of fire.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+3]D

**Mana Cloud**
An area-effect spell that raises a cloud of magical energy that does Physical damage.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** (F / 2)S

**Manablast**
A powerful blast of magical energy that causes Physical damage. This area-effect spell uses the elemental effect of blast.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** (F / 2)D

**Powerblast**
A powerful blast of magical energy that causes Physical damage. This area-effect spell uses the elemental effect of blast.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D

**Ram Touch**
The ram spell damages inanimate objects. The ramtouch spell functions in the same way as the basic ram spell (p. 151, SRII), except that the casting magician must touch the target.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Touch
* **Target:** Object Resistance Table
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-1]M

**Slay (Race/Species)**
Each version of this spell has a different, specific formula. Slay ork, slay normal, slay dog, slay westerndragon, slay cockroach, slay feathered serpent, and so forth are all separate spells. (Restricted Target: Specific Race/Species)
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-1]S

**Spirit Bolt**
A bolt of magical energy that causes Physical damage to a single spirit. (Restricted Target: Spirits.)
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Force (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-1]S

**Sterilize**
This area-effect spell kills small life forms such as bacteria and other microorganisms. In addition, it also destroys or renders unusable such biomaterial as skinflakes, stray hairs, spilled blood, and so forth that might be left behind at a crime scene. Organic material affected by this spell cannot be used as a material link (see RitualMagic, p. 35, and p. 135, SRII). Because the spell does not affect biomaterial attached to a living being, it does not kill the various helpful and harmful microorganisms living inside a creature. Successful application of the spell requires only 1 success. For game purposes, this spell does not affect organisms classified as bioweapons.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 4
* **Damage Level:** D
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D

**Stun Bolt**
A bolt of magical energy that causes Stun damage to a single target.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-1]S

**Stun Cloud**
An area-effect spell, instantly producing a cloud of magical energy that causes Stun damage.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-1]S

**Stun Missile**
A missile of magical energy that causes Stun damage to a single target.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F-2)-1]M

**Stun Touch**
A hands-on spell that causes Stun damage to a single target.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Touch
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-2]M

**Stunball**
An area-effect spell that causes Stun damage to a single target.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-1]D

**Stunblast**
An area-effect spell that causes Stun damage using the elemental effect of blast.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D

**Urban Renewal**
This spell works in a manner similar to the ram spell (p.151, SRII), but affects only parts of buildings. (RestrictedTarget: Buildings.) Also, this version is an area-effect spell. The gamemaster must check for the actual effect only against significant, important objects within the affected area. For other affected objects, the gamemaster may use his or her own discretion.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Object Resistance Table
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** (F / 2)D

**Wrecker**
This spell works in a manner similar to the ram spell (p.151, SRII), but affects only a single vehicle. (RestrictedTarget: Vehicles.)
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Object Resistance Table
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** (F / 2)S

---

**Detection Spells**

Note that the background count of an area affects all ranged detection spells cast within it (see BackgroundCount, p. 89).

**Analyze Magic**
This spell allows the casting magician to analyze a magic item as if assensing it. To determine the effect of the spell, make the Spell Force test using the Force Rating of the spell, focus, or other magical phenomena as the target number. To determine the information the caster acquires,consult the Astral Examination table (p. 146, SRII).
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** Force/Rating
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** (F / 2)M

**Clairaudience (Extended Range)**
This spell works in a manner similar to the clairaudience spell (p. 153, SRII), but includes the Extended Range option. For a complete explanation of Extended Range, see SpellDesign, p.110.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Extended
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-1]S

**Clairvoyance (Extended Range)**
This spell works in a manner similar to the clairvoyance spell (p. 153, SRII), but includes the Extended Range option.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Extended
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)-1]S

**Detect Enemies (Extended Range)**
This spell works in a manner similar to the detect enemies spell (p. 153, SRII), but includes the Extended Range option.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Extended
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** (F / 2)S

**Detect Magic**
The detect magic spell is an area-effect, general hypersense spell requiring a voluntary subject. Within limited range, the magician detects the presence of active magic in the form of magical items (foci), sustained, quickened, or anchored spells, and/ or spirits. This spell does not detect magically active characters.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** (F / 2)L

**Mindlink (Individual)**
This is a hypersense spell requiring a voluntary subject that allows the casting magician to communicate mentally,exchanging conversation, emotions, and mental images with a specific person chosen at the time of the spell's design (presumably a teammate.). The subject must be within both line of sight and the range of the spell at the time of the initialcasting. Once the magician has cast the spell, the target must remain within the limited-range area, but may move out of line of sight. (Restricted Target: Individual).
The Target Number to determine the mindlink's initial success is 4, and 1 success will establish the link. However,if the target of the spell does not wish to communicate, he or she may resist the spell by rolling a number of dice equal to his Willpower against a target number equal to the ForceRating of the spell. If the resisting player succeeds, reduce the caster's successes accordingly. If the spell fails to establish the link, the magician must recast it and resist corresponding Drain.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

---

**Health Spells**

The following spells represent only a few of the options possible using the spell design system on pp. 118-123 of this book.

**Decrease (Cybered Attribute)**
This spell works in a manner similar to the decrease (Attribute) spell (p. 154, SRII) except that it affects cyberedAttributes. Increase the Drain Level by +1 for the version of this spell that affects cybered Reaction.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Touch
* **Target:** 10-Essence
* **Attribute -1:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+3]L
    * **Duration:** Sustained
* **Attribute -2:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+3]M
    * **Duration:** Sustained
* **Attribute -3:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+3]S
    * **Duration:** Sustained
* **Attribute -4:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+3]D
    * **Duration:** Sustained

**Decrease Reflexes**
Similar to the increase reflexes spell (p. 155, SRII) this spell reduces the number of Initiative dice available to the target by the number indicated (-1, -2, or-3). This spell will not affect characters with cybernetic Initiative enhancements. Any character who ends up with no, or a negative number of Initiative dice as a result of this spell uses his or her Reaction as Initiative.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 2 x Reaction
* **-1 Initiative Die:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]S
    * **Duration:** Sustained
* **-2 Initiative Dice:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D
    * **Duration:** Sustained
* **-3 Initiative Dice:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+3]D
    * **Duration:** Sustained

**Healthy Glow**
This spell brightens eyes and hair, sloughs off dead skin cells, improves circulation, and promotes general well-being. A cosmetic spell, the rich use the healthy glow spell as a status symbol and pick-me-up. Though "permanent" in the sense that it does not require magical sustaining, the spell will wear off in time, based on the subject's lifestyle, diet,vices, and so on.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Touch
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Permanent (5 turns)
* **Drain:** (F / 2)L

**Oxygenate**
This spell, requiring a voluntary subject, oxygenates his or her blood, giving him or her extra Body dice (1 die for every 2 successes) to resist suffocation, strangulation, the effects of inhaled gas, or any other effect of oxygen deprivation. The spell also allows the subject to breathe water.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Preserve**
This spell prevents dead organic matter from drying out,decaying, or putrefying. The magician must roll a single success to cast the spell. The preserve spell can be used on food, but is most often used by forensic magicians to protect cadavers from decay before autopsy, or to preserve small organic samples taken from a crime scene for later use as a material link (see Ritual Magic, p. 35, and p. 135, SRII). Often, this spell is applied with a spell lock.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** Object Resistance Table
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]M

**Prophylaxis**
This spell, requiring a voluntary subject, gives him or her extra Body dice (1 die for every 2 successes) to resistinfection, drugs, or toxins. The subject also resists beneficialmedicines.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** 4
* **(L) Pathogen:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]L
    * **Duration:** Sustained
* **(M) Pathogen:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M
    * **Duration:** Sustained
* **(S) Pathogen:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]S
    * **Duration:** Sustained
* **(D) Pathogen:**
    * **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]D
    * **Duration:** Sustained

**Resist Pain**
This spell reduces the penalties suffered because ofPhysical damage (not Stun damage). Though this spell does not heal or treat damage, it offsets the injury modifiers (to the target number and Initiative) the character must use to reflect the damage. Magical assistance to resist pain requires a different spell for (L)ight, (M)oderate, and (S)erious Condition Levels. A resist pain spell cannot be used to counteract the pain of Deadly damage, because any character with a (D)eadly injury is unconscious and must be healed. The spell is "permanent" in that the boost to the patient's endorphin levels does not wear off. If the subject's damage rises above the Condition Level at which the patient is resisting pain, or the wounds heal, then the spell dissipates.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** 4
* **Light:**
    * **Drain:** (F / 2)M
    * **Duration:** Permanent (5 turns)
* **Moderate:**
    * **Drain:** (F / 2)S
    * **Duration:** Permanent (10 turns)
* **Serious:**
    * **Drain:** (F / 2)D
    * **Duration:** Permanent (15 turns)

**Stabilize**
When applied to a character with Deadly Physical damage, this spell stabilizes his condition so that he does not die. The magician must add the number of minutes elapsed since the character took damage to his or her target number for the Spell Success Test.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 4 + Minutes Elapsed
* **Duration:** Permanent (20 turns)
* **Drain:** (F / 2)S

---

**Illusion Spells**

Note that illusion spells cannot permanently harm a character, mentally or physically.

**Overstimulation**
This spell stimulates the sensory centers of the target's brain. As long as the spell lasts, the subject suffers penalties to all actions as if a number of boxes equal to the caster's successes were filled in on the target's Stun condition monitor. The penalties do not reflect actual damage, but only represent the spell's effects. If the casting magician rolls 10 or more successes, the victim will be conscious but incapable of action.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]M

**Physical Mask**
Similar to the mask spell (p. 156, SRII), this version works against technological devices.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]L

**Spectacle**
A multi-sensory version of the entertainment spell (p.156, SRII.).
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]M

**Trid Entertainment**
Similar to the entertainment spell (p. 156, SRII), this version can be "seen" by electronic cameras.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]L

**Trid Spectacle**
This version of the spectacle spell listed above can be "seen" by electronic cameras.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Vehicle Mask**
This spell works in a manner similar to the physical mask spell listed above, specifically affecting vehicles. The caster can only affect vehicles with a Body Rating equal to or less than one-half of the magician's Magic AttributeRating (round down). To cast the spell, the caster must touch the vehicle.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Touch
* **Target:** 6
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** (F / 2)L

---

**Manipulation Spells**

Potentially the most powerful class of spells inShadowrun, the following list represents only a sampling of the thousands of possible variations.

**Control Manipulations**

**Control Animal**
Similar to the control thoughts spell (p. 157, SRII), this spell works only on non-sentient animals. Sentience is determined at the gamemaster's discretion. Paranormal animals should resist this spell with either Willpower orEssence, whichever is higher.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]D

**Influence**
Similar to the control thoughts spell (p. 157, SRII), this spell permanently implants a single suggestion in the victim's mind. He will act according to this suggestion or carry out this order as if it were his own idea. Proving the falseness of the idea to the victim, or forcing the caster to withdraw it, can overcome the spell.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Duration:** Permanent (10 turns)
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]S

**Mob Mind**
This area-effect spell allows the caster to control the thoughts of all within its range. For purposes of making aSuccess Test to gauge the spell's effect, treat the crowd as a single character. Pedestrians are assumed to have aWillpower of 3. Major characters, both player and non-player,should defend against the spell individually, based on the number of successes the caster generates with his or her single Force Success Test.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+3]S

**Mob Mood**
Similar to the mob mind spell above, mob mood affects only the crowd's emotions. This spell does not give the caster control of a crowd, but allows him or her to shift a crowd's mood.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** Willpower (R)
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Telekinetic Manipulations**

**Animate**
This spell allows the caster to make inanimate objects move. The object moves according to its structure (balls can roll, rugs may crawl, humanoid statues can walk, and so on.). The spell imparts a certain amount of flexibility, allowing solid things like statues to move as if they had joints. The caster can only move the whole object, not just one part of it such as computer keys or vehicle weapons. Movement continues for a number of meters per action equal to one-half the caster's Magic Attribute Rating (round down).
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** Object Resistance Table
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Clout**
This telekinetic punch carries a Damage Code of (Caster's Willpower)M Stun. Normal Ranged Combat modifiers apply(p. 87, SRII). Per the normal Ranged Combat rules,successes from the spell's casting may be used to increase the damage. Impact armor defends against this spell.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** (F / 2)M

**Use (Skill)**
A limited form of the magic fingers spell (p.157, SRII),this spell allows the caster to use a skill telekinetically. The gamemaster determines which skills may be used in this manner. Typical examples include Armed Combat, B/RElectronics, Demolitions, Driving, and so on. Knowledge/skills, requiring no physical action, would not be appropriate for this spell. The spell operates in the same way as the magic fingers spell, except that the caster's actual SkillRating determines the spell's effect.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 6
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+3]L

**Transformation Manipulations**

**Acid**
This spell strikes the target with a spray of acid, using the elemental effect rules. (See Elemental Effects, p. 112.).
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]S

**Acid Bomb**
This area-effect spell strikes targets with a spray of acid,using the elemental effect rules (Elemental Effects, p. 112).
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D

**Acid Stream**
This spell strikes the target with a stream of acid, using the elemental effect rules (Elemental Effects, p. 112).
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D

**Astral Static**
This area-effect spell creates a cloud of crackling,swirling mana in astral space, generating a background count of I for every 2 successes the caster rolls. As with normal background count (see Background Count, p. 89) the rating of the static increases the target numbers of all AstralSuccess Tests within the area of effect, including the caster's target numbers.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** 6
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D

**Bind**
This spell entraps and holds the target in bands of mystical energy. The magician makes a Spell Success Test using the target's Quickness Attribute Rating as the target number. The target resists by making a Quickness SuccessTest against a target number equal to the Force Rating of the spell. Net successes in the caster's favor provide the effectiveBarrier Rating of the mystic energy. The character can attempt to escape by breaking the bands. In this situation, compare the character's StrengthRating to the Barrier Rating, per those rules (p. 98, SRII). The character must make a Strength Success Test against a target number equal to the Force Rating of the spell in order to exert more pressure against the bonds. Every 2 successes the character rolls allows him to increase his effectiveStrength Rating by 1 for this purpose. Upon breaking free, he must make a Body Success Test to resist (Character'sStrength)L Stun damage, representing the fatigue caused by his efforts.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Quickness(R)
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]S

**Blade Barrier**
Similar to the physical barrier spell (p. 158, SRII) and the bullet barrier spell following, this spell provides protection against bladed weapons. The barrier's effective BarrierRating equals the spell's Force Rating. The Impact ArmorRating may be added to the Barrier Rating. The personal form of this spell has a Drain Code of [(F / 2)+2]L.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 6
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Blast Barrier**
Similar to the physical barrier spell (p. 158, SRII), this spell provides protection against blast from grenades and similar weapons. The barrier's effective Barrier Ratingequals the spell's Force Rating. The Impact Armor Ratingmay be added to the Barrier Rating. The personal form of this spell has a Drain Code of [(F / 2)+2]L.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 6
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Bullet Barrier**
Similar to the physical barrier spell (p. 158, SRII), the bullet barrier spell provides protection against bullets and other ballistic weapons. The barrier's effective Barrier Rating equals the spell's Force Rating. The Ballistic Armor Rating can be added to the Barrier Rating. The personal form of this spell has a Drain Code of [(F / 2)+2]L.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 6
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**(Critter) Form**
Similar to the shapechange spell listed later in this section, this spell allows the magician to change into a specific, non-paranormal animal. This spell requires a voluntary subject.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** Willpower
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Fashion**
This spell instantly tailors clothing, transforming the target's garments into any fashion the caster wishes. The fashion spell requires a voluntary subject. The caster's extrasuccesses measure the degree of style in the tailoring. Thespell cannot change the clothing's protective value, only its cut, color, and fit.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Permanent (10 turns)
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Fire Strike**
This area-effect spell blasts flame into an area, using the elemental effect of fire.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+3]D

**Flame Burst**
This spell strikes the target with a burst of flame, using the elemental effect of fire.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** S
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+1]D

**Lock**
This spell holds any door, portal, closure, and other similar barriers magically closed as long as the caster sustains the spell. Because the lock has the same strength as the material of the door, opening it would require breaking or blasting through it.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Object Resistance Table
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Makeover**
This spell creates a complete makeover on a voluntary subject, including cosmetics, hair, clothes, and so on. It even polishes teeth and eliminates plaque. Changes wrought under this spell are as permanent as those made in a real beauty salon. The number of successes generated by the magician measures the degree of style in the makeover. Note that nothing actually changes; the subject is only cleaned and spruced up.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 4
* **Duration:** Permanent (10 turns)
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Seal**
Similar to the lock spell listed above, this spell reinforces a locked doorway. Every 2 successes the caster generates increase the door's Barrier Rating by 1.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Object Resistance Table
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]S

**Shapechange**
This spell transforms a voluntary subject into a normal critter, though the subject retains human consciousness. To determine the shapechanged critter's Physical Attributes,consult the Critter Statistics Table, p. 233, SRII, adding 1 to the critter's Base Ratings for every 2 successes the caster generates. Also, increase the critter's Reaction Rating by the subject's Intelligence Rating, to reflect the human mind controlling the animal form. Mental Attributes remain the subject's own. This spell does not transform clothing andequipment. Magicians under this spell can cast spells, but cannot fulfill geasa or use Centering Skills requiring activities that the animal shape cannot perform, such as speech.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** Willpower
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]S

**Spell Barrier**
Similar to the mana barrier spell (p. 158, SRII), the spellbarrier spell provides protection against spells. The personal form of this spell has a Drain Code of [(F / 2)+2]L.
* **Type:** Mana
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** 6
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]M

**Thunderclap**
This spell strikes the target with an explosion of air,making a thunderous noise. In addition to causing Stundamage, the spell deafens the target for 1 Combat Turn for every 2 successes generated by the caster.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** LOS
* **Target:** Body (R)
* **Damage Level:** M
* **Duration:** Instant
* **Drain:** (F / 2)S

**Transform**
This spell changes the subject into a normal critter. A transformed being has no awareness of its former state, and has only animal intelligence. The spell will not transform clothing and equipment.
* **Type:** Physical
* **Range:** Limited
* **Target:** Willpower
* **Duration:** Sustained
* **Drain:** [(F / 2)+2]S

---

**Table of Spells**

**Combat Spells**

| Name | Drain | Type | Duration |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Death Touch | [(F / 2)-1]S | M | I |
| Fire Bolt | [(F / 2)+1]D | P | I |
| Fire Cloud | [(F / 2)+1]D | P | I |
| Fire Dart | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | I |
| Fire Missile | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | I |
| Fireball | [(F / 2)+3]D | P | I |
| Hellblast* | [(F / 2)+6]D | P | I |
| Mana Bolt* | (F / 2)S | M | I |
| Mana Cloud | (F / 2)S | M | I |
| Mana Dart* | (F / 2)L | M | I |
| Mana Missile* | (F / 2)M | M | I |
| Manaball* | (F / 2)S | P | I |
| Manablast | (F / 2)D | M | I |
| Power Bolt* | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | I |
| Power Dart* | [(F / 2)+1]L | P | I |
| Power Missile* | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | I |
| Powerball* | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | I |
| Powerblast | [(F / 2)+1]D | P | I |
| Ram* | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | I |
| Ram Touch | [(F / 2)-1]M | P | I |
| Slay (Race/Species) | [(F / 2)-1]S | M | I |
| Sleep* | [(F / 2)-1]S | M | I |
| Spirit Bolt | [(F / 2)-1]S | M | I |
| Sterilize | [(F / 2)+1]D | P | I |
| Stun Bolt | [(F / 2)-1]D | M | I |
| Stun Cloud | [(F / 2)-1]S | M | I |
| Stun Missile | [(F / 2)-1]M | M | I |
| Stun Touch | [(F / 2)-2]M | M | I |
| Stunball | [(F / 2)-1]D | M | I |
| Stunblast | [(F / 2)+1]D | M | I |
| Urban Renewal | (F / 2)D | P | I |
| Wrecker | (F / 2)S | P | I |

**Detection Spells**

| Name | Drain | Type | Duration |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Analyze Device* | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | S |
| Analyze Magic | (F / 2)M | M | S |
| Analyze Truth* | (F / 2)S | M | S |
| Clairaudience* | (F / 2)M | M | S |
| Clairaudience (Extended) | [(F / 2)-1]S | M | S |
| Clairvoyance* | (F / 2)M | M | S |
| Clairvoyance (Extended) | [(F / 2)-1]S | M | S |
| Combat Sense* | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | S |
| Detect Enemies* | [(F / 2)+1]M | M | S |
| Detect Enemies (Extended) | (F / 2)S | M | S |
| Detect Individual* | (F / 2)L | M | S |
| Detect Life* | (F / 2)L | M | S |
| Detect (Life Form)* | [(F / 2)-1]L | M | S |
| Detect Magic | (F / 2)L | M | S |
| Detect (Object)* | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | S |
| Mindlink (Individual) | [(F / 2)+2]M | M | S |
| Mind Probe* | [(F / 2)+2]D | M | S |
| Personal Combat Sense* | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | S |
–
**Illusion Spells**

| Name | Drain | Type | Duration |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Chaos* | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Chaotic World* | [(F / 2)+2]S | P | S |
| Confusion* | (F / 2)S | M | S |
| Entertainment* | [(F / 2)+1]L | M | S |
| Improved Invisibility* | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | S |
| Invisibility* | (F / 2)M | M | S |
| Mask* | (F / 2)L | M | S |
| Overstimulation | [(F / 2)+1]M | M | S |
| Physical Mask | [(F/ 2)+1]L | P | S |
| Spectacle | [(F / 2)+1]M | M | S |
| Stimulation* | [(F / 2)+1]L | M | S |
| Stink* | [(F / 2)+1]S | M | S |
| Trid Entertainment | [(F / 2)+2]L | P | S |
| Trid Spectacle | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Vehicle Mask | (F / 2)L | P | S |

**Health Spells**

| Name | Drain | Type | Duration |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Antidote L Toxin* | (F / 2)L | P | P |
| Antidote M Toxin* | (F / 2)M | P | P |
| Antidote S Toxin* | (F / 2)S | P | P |
| Antidote D Toxin* | (F / 2)D | P | P |
| Cure L Disease* | (F / 2)L | P | P |
| Cure M Disease* | (F / 2)M | P | P |
| Cure S Disease* | (F / 2)S | P | P |
| Cure D Disease* | (F / 2)D | P | P |
| Decrease -1 Attribute* | [(F / 2)+1]L | P | S |
| Decrease -2 Attribute* | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | S |
| Decrease -3 Attribute* | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | S |
| Decrease -4 Attribute* | [(F / 2)+1]D | P | S |
| Decrease -1 Cybered Attribute* | [(F / 2)+3]L | P | S |
| Decrease -2 Cybered Attribute* | [(F / 2)+3]M | P | S |
| Decrease -3 Cybered Attribute* | [(F / 2)+3]S | P | S |
| Decrease -4 Cybered Attribute* | [(F / 2)+3]D | P | S |
| Decrease Reflexes* | | | |
| -1 Initiative Die | [(F / 2)+1]S | M | S |
| -2 Initiative Dice | [(F / 2)+1]D | M | S |
| -3 Initiative Dice | [(F / 2)+3]D | M | S |
| Detox L Toxin* | [(F / 2)-2]L | P | P |
| Detox M Toxin* | [(F / 2)-2]M | P | P |
| Detox S Toxin* | [(F / 2)-2]S | P | P |
| Detox D Toxin* | [(F / 2)-2]D | P | P |
| Heal* | (F / 2)(Wound Level) | M | P |
| Healthy Glow | (F / 2)L | P | P |
| Increase +1 Attribute* | [(F/ 2)+1]L | M | S |
| Increase +2 Attribute* | [(F / 2)+1]M | M | S |
| Increase +3 Attribute* | [(F / 2)+1]S | M | S |
| Increase +4 Attribute* | [(F / 2)+1]D | M | S |
| Increase +1 Cybered Attribute* | [(F / 2)+3]L | P | S |
| Increase +2 Cybered Attribute* | [(F / 2)+3]M | P | S |
| Increase +3 Cybered Attribute* | [(F / 2)+3]S | P | S |
| Increase +4 Cybered Attribute* | [(F / 2)+3]D | P | S |
| Increase Reflexes* | | | |
| +1 Initiative Die | (F / 2)M | M | S |
| +2 Initiative Dice | (F / 2)S | M | S |
| +3 Initiative Dice | (F / 2)D | M | S |
| Oxygenate | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Preserve | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | S |
| Prophylaxis L Pathogen | [(F / 2)+2]L | P | S |
| Prophylaxis M Pathogen | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Prophylaxis S Pathogen | [(F / 2)+2]S | P | S |
| Prophylaxis D Pathogen | [(F / 2)+2]D | P | S |
| Resist Pain (Light) | (F / 2)M | M | P |
| Resist Pain (Moderate) | (F / 2)S | M | P |
| Resist Pain (Serious) | (F / 2)D | M | P |
| Stabilize | (F / 2)S | P | P |
| Treat* | (F / 2)(Wound Level) | M | P |

**Manipulation Spells**

| Name | Drain | Type | Duration |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Acid | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | I |
| Acid Bomb | [(F / 2)+1]D | P | I |
| Acid Stream | [(F / 2)+1]D | P | I |
| Animate | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Armor* | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Astral Static | [(F / 2)+1]D | M | S |
| Banter* | [(F / 2)+2]S | P | S |
| Bind | [(F / 2)+2]S | P | S |
| Blade Barrier | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Blast Barrier | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Bullet Barrier | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Clout | (F / 2)M | P | I |
| Control Actions* | [(F / 2)+2]S | M | S |
| Control Animal | [(F / 2)+2]D | M | S |
| Control Emotion* | [(F / 2)+2]M | M | S |
| Control Thoughts* | [(F / 2)+2]D | M | S |
| (Critter) Form | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Fashion | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | P |
| Fire Strike | [(F / 2)+3]D | P | I |
| Flame Bomb* | [(F / 2)+1]D | P | I |
| Flame Burst | [(F / 2)+1]D | P | I |
| Flamethrower* | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | I |
| Hibernate* | (F / 2)S | P | S |
| Ice Sheet* | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | I |
| Ignite* | [(F / 2)+2]D | P | P |
| Influence | [(F / 2)+2]S | M | P |
| Levitate Item* | [(F / 2)+1]L | P | S |
| Levitate Person* | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | S |
| Light* | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Lock | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Magic Fingers* | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Makeover | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | P |
| Mana Barrier* | [(F + 2)+1]S | M | S |
| Mob Mind | [(F / 2)+3]S | M | S |
| Mob Mood | [(F / 2)+2]M | M | S |
| Poltergeist* | [(F / 2)+1]S | P | S |
| Shadow* | [(F / 2)+2]M | P | S |
| Seal | [(F / 2)+2]S | P | S |
| Shapechange | [(F / 2)+2]S | P | S |
| Spark* | [(F / 2)+1]M | P | S |
| Spell Barrier | [(F / 2)+1]M | M | S |
| Thunderclap | (F / 2)S | P | I |
| Transform | [(F / 2)+2]S | P | S |
| Use (Skill) | [(F / 2)+3]L | P | S |
