Following are a few concepts and key terms used in Shadowrun. Some are general roleplaying terms, and others are peculiar to this game system. The rules will make a lot more sense if players become familiar with them. The terms and concepts have been combined into one section for easy reference. The first time a term appears in this orientation section, it is set in bold type.
MAKING DICE ROLLS 
In Shadowrun, characters often encounter situations in which the gamemaster will ask the player to roll dice to determine the outcome. These dice rolls, called Success Tests, gauge how well or poorly a character performs a required task, be it shooting a security guard who disapproves of his face, or persuading an employer that one’s services are worth a lot more than what was originally offered. Success Tests also determine how well a character resists damage and other unpleasant matters.
Shadowrun uses a number of six-sided dice to resolve any challenge for a character. The gamemaster will not require a test to find out if a character can open the door, but will probably ask the player to roll dice to see if his character can somersault through the office door, land on his feet, and fire his AK-98 at the three assassins standing behind the corporation’s chairman of the board—all without splattering himself or the hostage all over the room.
Unlike most games, the results of the dice rolled are not added together, unless the rules specifically direct the player to do so or unless D6 is preceded by a number or a Skill or Attribute name: (Attribute + D6).
GAME CONCEPTS 

The gamemaster will provide the player with a target number against which he will make the die roll. The player rolls the indicated number of dice and then compares each die result individually to the target number. Each individual die that scores equal to, or greater than, the target number is considered a success. The more dice that score successes, the bette--r the result.

Nik, a Cat shaman, is rolling four dice against a Target Number 4. The four dice come up as a 2, 3, 4, and 6. The 4 and the 6 equal or exceed the target number, which gives Nik 2 successes.
AUTOMATIC FAILURE OR SUCCESS
Two other rules are important when rolling the dice for a test. These are the Rule of One and the Rule of Six.
Rule Of One
This is the fumble rule, and it has two parts.

Any time a die roll result comes up 1 in a test, that die is an automatic failure, no matter what the target number. But the test can still succeed as long as other dice succeed.

If ALL the dice rolled for a test come up 1s, it means that the character has made a disastrous mistake. The result may be humorous, embarrassing, or deadly. The gamemaster determines whatever tone is appropriate for the situation, the players, and the dramatic or humorous needs of the moment.

Individual rules may also have particular results when the Rule of One is applied.
Rule Of Six

The Rule of Six allows tests to succeed against target numbers greater than 6 (since a die only has six sides, it's probably a good thing this rule exists). When making a test against a target number greater than 6, the player may re-roll any dice that comes up a 6 and then add the new result to the 6. Say, for example, that one die result is a 6 in a roll against a target number greater than 6. The player re-rolls the 6, with a result of 5. Adding the two together, the new die roll result is 11 (6 + 5). The player can re-roll additional 6s if the current die result total is still less than the target number. For example, to beat a target number of 14 (really hard) the player would have to roll a 6, then reroll for another 6, and then re-roll for a 2 or better (6 + 6 + 2 = 14).

Remember, though, it does not matter by how much the individual die roll beats the target number, just that it does. Once the target number has been equaled or exceeded, stop rolling.
SUCCESS TESTS

As stated above, players and gamemaster may have to make Success Tests from time to time during the game. The number of dice used is equal to the appropriate Attribute or Skill Rating of the character who must make the test. In other words, that rating indicates how many six-sided dice to roll for the test. For example, to make a Firearms Test, check the character's Firearm Skill Rating and roll that number of six-sided dice for the test. For a Willpower Test, use the character's Willpower Rating to determine the number of dice to roll.

The rules give the target number for many tests. For others, the gamemaster determines what is appropriate. Each die result that equals or exceeds the target number is a success. A single success indicates that the character has accomplished the task, but the more successes rolled, the better. In most situations, multiple successes mean that the character will receive more information, or do more damage, or make that bank shot off the troll's head and into the side-corner pocket look so easy a child could do it.

In other Shadowrun products, this standard Success Test is often written in an abbreviated form, such as Willpower (5) Test, which is really just a shorthand way of saying "make a Willpower Test using a Target Number 5."
DICE POOLS
When things are hot, and the character's basic skills and attributes are not enough to get him through to the next morning, he needs help. That's where Dice Pools come in.

A dice pool is a number of dice that a player can add to those normally allowed for a test. The four possible pools come from different sources, usually skills or attributes. The Combat Pool, for instance, is based on various Attributes, and it can be used for nearly any combat-related test. Other dice pools can be used to supplement other tests. The Magic Pool helps magic tests, the Control Pool helps vehicle tests, and the Hacking Pool creates better odds for decking tests.

The number of dice in a pool is equal to the character's rating in the Skill or Attribute that is the source of the pool. Each die in a pool may be used once during an action. A player's Combat Turn can consist of several actions.

Dice Pools can refresh, or be restored to their original number of dice available to the player.
MODIFIERS

The Shadowrun rules often call for a plus or minus modifier. Unless otherwise stated, that modifier is applied to the target number. Thus, a -3 modifier to a Target Number 5 produces a modified Target Number of 5 - 3, or 2. If the rules call for +2 dice or -1 dice, the player adds or subtracts that number of dice from the dice for the test. Thus, a shaman who has +2 dice for summoning certain nature spirits adds 2 more dice to the normal number he can roll for that test.
GAME TERMS

These simplified definitions of common game terms will help acquaint players with the rules. The body of the rules contains complete definitions and examples in the appropriate sections.
CHARACTERS
Archetypes are pregenerated characters created from the main classes, races, and character types of Shadowrun. Players can use these with little additional preparation.
Attributes are part of each character's description and give a general picture of his or her abilities. Skills and spells refine those abilities.

A Character Record Sheet keeps track of each character's belongings, abilities, appearance, and status.

An important part of the record sheet is the Condition Monitor, consisting of two tracks. The Physical Damage Track displays wound damage and shows when the character dies. The Stun Damage Track shows fatigue and stun damage and indicates when a character falls unconscious. Equipment like vehicles and cyberdecks also have Condition Monitors to track the amount of damage the object has taken.

Weapons have a Damage Code that tells the player how much damage they do. The code consists of a number and a letter. The number is the Power Level, which indicates the difficulty of offsetting damage from such a weapon. The letter indicates the Damage Level (Light, Moderate, Serious, or Deadly) that the weapon inflicts.

There is one other term Shadowrun uses to describe characters. That term is Karma, the numerical representation of a character's accomplishments. Later on, a character can use his or her Karma to improve skills and even attributes. He or she can also use Karma to do better in tests or to get out of trouble.
CONCENTRATIONS AND SPECIALIZATIONS
Areas of knowledge or technique are known as skills, which have ratings that are used to carry out tests. A Concentration represents a focused field of training or education in one aspect of a general skill, for example, a character with firearms Skill can concentrate in rifles, improving his ability when firing rifles, but reducing his skill with other types of firearms. Specialization is a further narrowing of a focus in a skill that already is a Concentration. This increases a character's expertise in one specific area, but it lowers his ability in related subjects. The character with a Concentration in rifles could then specialize in AK-98s, becoming more proficient with that weapon but less skilled with other weapons. A character need not Concentrate or Specialize.
MAGIC
Magicians, characters who can use magic, come in two types. Hermetic magicians believe that magic is a natural force that can be understood and controlled like any other physical force. Their magic comes from rigorously applied rules. Shamanic magicians believe in spirits that are a part of all things. Their magic involves making deals with those spirits.
Each type of spell or spirit has a Force Rating, chosen by the magician and limited by his abilities, time, and money. The force acts like a skill or attribute rating in tests.
Spellcasting and Conjuring spirits causes a magician fatigue, called Drain. After casting a spell, the magician checks the spell's Drain Code, which works much like a weapon's Damage Code, except that it works against the caster of the spell. The Drain Code consists of a letter and a number. The letter stands for the Drain Level (Light, Moderate, Serious, Deadly), just as with a weapon. Instead of the weapon's Power Level, the spell's Force Rating indicates the difficulty of avoiding Stun damage from the Drain of casting a spell. The magician makes a test to keep from going down to Drain.

MATRIX
The Matrix is the cybernetic analog space inside the Grid, the worldwide computer network. Only a character equipped with a cyberdeck can enter this "cyberspace," which appears as a huge lattice.
Jacking into the Matrix enhances the character's capabilities in a number of ways, but that character only seems to be inside the Grid. What happens is that he leaves a zombie-like shell in the physical world for his companions to protect while he wanders the Matrix. A character inside the Matrix appears as a persona, a stylized image of his personality. Software, electronic security systems, electronic addresses, other personas, and everything else the character encounters in the Matrix appear as constructs, other stylized images that appear in the same motif.
METAHUMANITY
Orks are people too, don't ya know? And if you ever forget again, I'll snap yer neck like a twig.
—John Wetland, ork

Since the Awakening, five major subspecies of Homo sapiens have appeared throughout the world. They are evenly distributed geographically, racially, and ethnically, though variants do appear.

The following information is available courtesy of Studies in Awakened Biology, by Doctors Eileen Van Buren and Peter Carmine, published in 2048 by Modern Information Services, Atlanta (CAS). The biases are the authors' own, in particular, their view of Homo sapiens more as interesting creatures than sentient beings. The authors also tend to view personal or cultural traits as genetic predispositions.

Elves and dwarfs are nearly always born to parents of the same race. Elves beget elves, dwarfs beget dwarfs, and so on. In the instances of attempts at natural crossbreeding, the child is always of the same race as either the elf or dwarf parent. There appears to be an almost exact 50 percent chance of either expression. No true half-breeds or crossbreeds are known to exist. By 2050, dual human parentage almost never results in elf or dwarf offspring.

The same holds true for orks and trolls, who are nearly always born to parents of the same race. Unlike the early days of goblinization, it is now rare for a human child (dual human parentage) to express into ork or troll form, but it does occur. Crossbreed attempts between the elf/dwarf group and the ork/troll group nearly always result in a goblinized expression.

DWARF
Homo sapiens pumilionis
Identification: The average dwarf is 1.2 meters tall and weighs 54 kilograms. His coloration is usually pinkish-white or light tan, but may be as dark as ebony. Female dwarfs have 2 mammae, and all dwarfs have 32 teeth. Dwarf legs are disproportionately short, making them poor runners. Their torsos are wide, with great breadth at the shoulders, endowing the subspecies with increased arm strength. Their body hair is well-developed and head hair profuse; males have extensive facial hair. The dwarf nose tends to be large and long, and the ears slightly pointed.
Habitat: This subspecies prefers artificial or natural caverns in wilderness areas. In urban environments, dwarfs show a preference for dwelling in basements or subbasements.
Habits: Dwarfs may be active by day or night. Their diet is omnivorous. Populations form small family groups, and though they show isolationist tendencies, small enclaves are found in communities all over the world. Their life span is unverified, but predictions based on metabolic rates run to more than a hundred years. Their breeding season is unrestricted. The gestation period is 284 days.
Young: One. Birth weight is 5.6 percent of mother's weight. Suckling time is more than 15 months.

Commentary: With eyes sensitive to the infrared spectrum, a dwarf's activity is as unrestricted underground as above. Dwarf phenotypes also show an increased resistance to pathogens.

ELF
Homo sapiens nobilis
Identification: The height of the typical elf is 1.9 meters, and his weight is 72 kilograms. Coloration is pale pink to white or ebony. The females have 2 mammae, and all elves have 32 teeth. Nobilis is more slender than sapiens and has a lighter build, though the bone structure and musculature are equally strong. The slenderness is exaggerated in nobilis of Polynesian and Australian aboriginal origin. Elven body hair is sparse, but head hair is usually luxuriant and extremely fine. Elven hair is usually straight or slightly wavy, and is almost always worn long. There are also several populations showing tightly curled head hair, however. The eyes are almond-shaped; in darker-skinned nobilis they are often slightly protuberant. The ears come to a definite point.
Habitat: In urban areas, elves inhabit standard human structures. In wilderness areas, they prefer to live in structures built of natural materials or living plants.
Habits: Elves are nocturnal beings. Their diet is vegetarian. They tend to live in small groups, preferably apart from the rest of humanity. The elf life-expectancy is unverified, with possible life spans of several hundred years, but metabolic studies are inconclusive. The elven breeding season is unrestricted. Gestation is 360 days.
Young: Usually one, though twins are common. In such cases. only one is nobilis. with the other usually nonviable. Birth weight Is 5.2 percent of mother's weight. Suckling time Is more than 25 months. Comment.uy: Elven eyes are heavily endowed with rod structures. This allows them to see In dim light far better than Sapiens.

Young: Usually one, though twins are common. In such cases, only one is nobilis, with the other usually nonviable. Birth weight is 5.2 percent of mother's weight. Suckling time is more than 25 months.

Commentary: Elven eyes are heavily endowed with rod structures. This allows them to see in dim light far better than sapiens.
HUMAN
Homo sapiens sapiens
Identification: Humans stand about 1.7 meters high and weigh about 70 kilograms. Coloration is variable, from pinkish-white to ebony. There are three major ethnic groups, each of which varies considerably in size, coloration, and hair distribution and quality, but the ears are always rounded, the skull has 32 teeth, and the women have 2 mammae.
Habitat: Humans prefer to dwell in roofed structures.
Habits: Most humans prefer daytime activity. Their diet is omnivorous. Human populations live in small family groups, pairs of adults, or alone. The worldwide average human life span is 55 years. The breeding season is unrestricted. Gestation is 266.5 days.
Young: Usually one. Twins are uncommon and higher multiples even rarer. Birth weight is 5.5 percent of mother's weight. Suckling time is more than twelve months. An individual offspring may be of subspecies robustus or ingentis and may express (undergo Unexplained Genetic Expression) at puberty.
Commentary: As the form of Homo sapiens present throughout recorded history, Homo sapiens sapiens is sometimes called "normal," as distinguished from other subspecies. This is not a scientific term, as any subspecies is just as normal as another. In common usage, the term differentiates sapiens from the groups of "metahumans" whose existence has been recorded since 2011.

ORK
Homo sapiens robustus

Identification: Orks are 1.9 meters tall and weigh 95 kilograms. Their skin coloration varies from pale pink to ebony. Ork bodies are proportioned similarly to that of sapiens, but robustus is more heavily built. Head hair is usually more prominent than the sapiens ethnic group from which the individual robustus was derived. The ork nose tends to be broad and the lips thin. The ears show definite points and are sometimes elongated as well. The ork skull has 32 teeth, with greatly enlarged lower canines. Ork females have 2 mammae.
Similar Species: Robustus, like ingentis, is highly variable in appearance, leading investigators to theorize that certain individuals or small communities are, in fact, other subspecies or other species entirely. This variety of types continues to mislead unwary researchers.
Habitat: Usually in roofed buildings.
Habits: Orks are active day and night, but seem to prefer the night. Their diet is omnivorous, but with a distinct preference for meat. Populations form large groups, often with a tribal structure. The typical life span appears to be between 35 and 40 years. Their breeding season is unrestricted. Gestation is 187 days.
Young: Ork mothers usually bear four children, but births of six or eight are not uncommon. Birth weight is 4.2 percent of mother's weight. Suckling time is more than seven months. Most newborns are obviously robustus, but may appear as sapiens; 95 percent of the latter will express at puberty, which occurs around age ten.
Commentary: The higher proportion of rod over cone structures in the ork's eyes allows enhanced low-light vision. Individuals expressing into robustus usually evidence negative psychological effects, with severe psychoses and aberrant behavioral patterns common. Individuals born robustus usually socialize normally.

TROLL
Homo sapiens ingentis
Identification: Trolls measure 2.8 meters and weigh 225 kilograms. Skin color varies from pinkish-white to mahogany brown, and usually remains unchanged after ingentisization, or transformation into troll form. Ingentis body proportions differ from those of sapiens, with the ratio of arm-to-leg length significantly higher in ingentis. Trolls are very heavily built and occasionally exhibit dermal bone deposition, resulting in spines, rough surface texture, or an armor-plated effect. Body hair is usually well-developed, but may be absent altogether. Head hair is usually more prominent than among the sapiens ethnic group from which the individual ingentis was derived. The nose tends to be broad. The ears show definite points and are sometimes elongated. The sloped skull has 34 teeth; lower canines are enlarged and molars display extreme convolutions, which researchers interpret to mean that ingentis teeth are constantly regenerating. Troll females have 2 mammae.
Similar Species: Some investigators believe that individuals or small communities of this subspecies are, in fact, other species entirely. Further investigation, including breeding studies, are required to confirm such hypotheses, as trolls are highly variable in appearance.
Habitat: Trolls who live in wilderness areas use caverns and converted structures such as bridges for their dwelling places. In urban areas, they prefer areas shunned by "normals," such as sewers or derelict buildings.
Habits: Trolls prefer nighttime activity. Their diet is omnivorous. Populations usually congregate in small groups, which often cohabit with subspecies robustus. Metabolic studies and direct observation indicate a life expectancy of about 50 years. The breeding season is unrestricted. Gestation is 259 days.
Young: Usually one. Birth weight is 2.5 percent of mother's weight. Suckling time is more than 15 months.
Commentary: The sensitivity of trolls' eyes to the infrared portion of the spectrum allows a troll almost unrestricted activity after dark. Expression from sapiens to ingentis adversely affects an individual's mental condition, often resulting in psychosis and aberrant behavioral patterns. Individuals born as ingentis do not experience this trauma and usually socialize normally.

CREATING A CHARACTER
Character? Sorry chummer, titanium is what I'm made of.
—Jackal, street samurai
A character in Shadowrun is much like a character in a novel or film, except that the player controls his or her actions. Composed of a collection of attributes and skills, the character has the personality that the player injects into it. Without that personality, the character remains an it. Only when fleshed out can a character become minimally he or she, and, with good characterization, someone memorable.

CHARACTER INFORMATION
Characters in Shadowrun possess various Physical, Mental, and Magical Attribute and Skill Ratings, and may also use cyberware, spells, gear, and extras. Though these features are important, defining the character in a way that permits the use of the Shadowrun game system to judge his actions, they are still just numbers on a page. Character, chummer, is what you make it.
For the most satisfactory results when creating a character, players and gamemasters should first familiarize themselves with the rest of the rules in this book. It's better to have all the facts going in than to regret a decision later.

RACE
Characters in Shadowrun may be of one of the four subgroups of Homo sapiens: the predominant human (Homo sapiens sapiens), elf (Homo sapiens nobilis), dwarf (Homo sapiens pumilionis), ork (Homo sapiens robustus), and troll (Homo sapiens ingentis). As described on pp. 34–38, all are human beings, at least according to the geneticists. Racists say differently.

In the early 2050s, humans are still the most numerous race populating the planet. Each of the other races, grouped collectively as metahumans, are represented about equally, but are scattered unevenly across the globe. In some places, humans form an extreme minority, but those tend to be areas where metahumans have gathered for safety, protection, and isolation.
Humans make up the standard. As characters, they receive no special attribute or ability modifications.
Dwarfs are hardier (slightly higher Body), less agile (lower Quickness), stronger (higher Strength), and more willful (higher Willpower) than humans. They also have thermographic vision, which allows them to see radiated infrared (heat) energy as well as the normal light spectrum. They are also more resistant to disease. And yes, they are short.
Elves are more agile (higher Quickness) and more charismatic (higher Charisma) than humans. They also have low-light vision, which enables them to see clearly in near-total darkness.
Orks are much tougher (much higher Body), stronger (higher Strength), less charismatic (lower Charisma), and less acute (lower Intelligence) than humans. They too have low-light vision.
Trolls are big and nasty. They are a lot tougher (much higher Body), slower (lower Quickness), much stronger (higher Strength), less charismatic (lower Charisma), less acute (lower Intelligence), and less willful (lower Willpower) than humans. They have thermographic vision, really long arms that give them advantages in melee combat, and extremely tough skin that makes them resistant to damage.
A player does not have to pay extra to create a human character. Players who want to play a metahuman (dwarf, elf, ork, or troll) must pay a little extra for the privilege.

ATTRIBUTES
In Shadowrun, each character has eight Attributes, or nine, if the character is a magician. There are three Physical Attributes, three Mental Attributes, and two (or three) Special Attributes.
ATTRIBUTE TABLE		
Physical Attributes	Mental Attributes	Special Attributes
Body	Intelligence	Essence
Quickness	Willpower	(Magic)
Strength	Charisma	Reaction

Body represents general health and resistance to injury and pain.
Quickness represents overall dexterity and agility. It also sets movement, walking, and running speeds.
Strength represents the ability to lift, carry, and cause physical damage.
Intelligence represents overall quickness of mind, aptitude, and the ability to perceive surroundings. Knowledge is represented by skills, so a stupid character would have low Skill Ratings, and not necessarily low Intelligence.
Willpower represents determination, mental stability, and the will to resist certain kinds of mental and fatigue damage.
Charisma represents attractiveness (not necessarily physical beauty), persuasiveness, personal aura, and general likability.
Essence is a measure of the soundness of the central nervous system and spirit. Invasive things, such as cyberware, reduce Essence. When Essence declines, Magic declines by the same amount.
Magic is a measure of magical energy. Serious damage to the body and invasive additions such as cyberware reduce magical energy.
Reaction determines how quickly and how often a character can act under pressure. The Reaction Rating is the average of Quickness and Intelligence, rounded down.

Attribute Ratings
A normal human character's Physical and Mental Attributes are rated from 1 to 6. Humans with cyberware, as well as metahumans (elves, dwarfs, and such), can have higher scores in one or more Attributes. Each racial type has its own maximums.

When a character's Attributes are listed, the first number is always the natural, unmodified Attribute. Modifications due to cyberware and magic create a modified Attribute Rating listed in parenthesis following the base number, in this manner: 4 (6). Players can spend Karma during character advancement (p. 190) to improve an Attribute, which increases both the natural and modified ratings. Sometimes the rules refer to natural, as opposed to augmented, Attribute Ratings. The natural rating is the Attribute Rating minus any modifications for cyberware or magic. The augmented rating includes cyberware. The increases a physical adept receives from some special abilities are considered to be natural Attributes, though they come from a magical source.

All characters have a starting Essence Rating of 6. Cyberware implants and improperly healed damage reduce this rating. No character may start with an Essence greater than 6. Characters can never have an Essence less than 0. If they do, they die.

If the character can use magic, his Magic Rating starts at 6, but is equal to the Essence Rating, rounded down. So, a magician with an Essence Rating of 4.5 has a Magic Rating of 4. A character who cannot use magic has no Magic Rating.

Newly created characters beginning the game cannot have any Attribute Rating greater than those indicated on the Racial Maximum Table. Attribute Ratings may, however, increase (to a point) through character advancement during the game. Average citizens (non-player characters) never have Attributes higher than the racial maximum. Specific non-player characters might exceed the racial maximums, however, and so the players should not take anything for granted. (After all, the NPCs do have to be tough enough to take on the player characters.)
HUMAN ATTRIBUTE RATINGS	
Rating	Description
1	Weak
2	Underdeveloped
3	Typical
4	Improved
5	Superior
6	Maximum unmodified human
RACIAL MAXIMUM TABLE					
HumanElf	Dwarf	Ork	Troll
Body		6	6	7	9	11
Quickness	6	7	5	6	5
Strength	6	6	8	8	10
Charisma	6	8	6	5	4
Intelligence	6	6	6	5	4
Willpower	6	6	6	6	5
Essence	6	6	6	6	6
Magic		6	6	6	5	4
Reaction	6	6	5	5	4

SKILLS

Skills define what a character knows and can do. They range from physical abilities such as Unarmed Combat, to certain sets of knowledge such as Biology. Skills are rated on a scale similar to the attributes, where a Rating of 3 is the (mythical) average rating. Beginning characters cannot have a Skill Rating higher than 6, unless the character has a Concentration or Specialization.

Concentrations and Specializations mean that a character has honed or narrowed his or her scope of knowledge. Within that narrower focus, however, the character is more skilled. See Concentrations and Specializations in the Skills chapter, p. 70, for more information.

CYBERWARE
Technological additions to the human body known as cyberware can improve a character's Attributes and abilities. Certain cyberware makes it possible for a character to carry out extraordinary actions, such as datarunning in the global computer Matrix, or using a vehicle control rig to control a vehicle by thought alone.

A player who wishes to give cyberware to a character that he is creating must purchase it with funds made available during character creation. Each piece of cyberware also costs Essence, and reduces the character's Essence Rating by a certain amount. Characters can never have an Essence Rating less than 0.

Characters can acquire more cyberware once the game has begun. Additional cyberware costs money, but the character can now use money earned in the game. Additional cyberware also costs Essence. Unfortunately, new cyberware does not simply materialize in a character's mailbox. The character must find someone who has the part available, at a reasonable price, and then must find someone to install it surgically. Players do not have to find parts or undergo surgery to obtain cyberware during character generation.

SPELLS
Magical spells are only available to magicians capable of sorcery. Certain types of limited-ability mages (see Adepts, p. 45, under Building A Character, and the Magic chapter, p. 124) cannot use the Sorcery Skill for spellcasting and so do not have spells.
A new character's first spells are acquired during character creation. Additional spells can be learned during the game, but the character must find a teacher and the money to pay for the lessons. See Learning A New Spell, p. 132.
Spells have a Force Rating that begins at 1 and increases as the spell's power increases. Starting spells cannot have a Force greater than 6. There is no such limitation once the game begins.

GEAR
Gear is stuff the character owns. Gear includes weapons, clothes, a radio, a car, magical foci, and so on. The list of available gear appears (oddly enough) in the Gear chapter, p. 236. Beginning characters purchase gear with a pool of money available only during character creation. Once the game starts, anything a character wants to buy he'll have to buy with money he earns. Welcome to real life, chummer.
Some gear have ratings, beginning at 1 and increasing with the capability and sophistication of the item. Starting gear cannot have a rating greater than 6, even though a particular type of gear may be available with higher ratings. There is no such limitation after the game begins.

EXTRAS
Extras is a catchall category that covers aspects of a character's life that are more general than a spell or piece of gear. Some of these "advantages" are only available during character generation, so give them careful consideration.

Contacts
Contacts are vital in Shadowrun. These are the people a character knows who can reveal information important to the character's work, legitimate or not. Contacts are the purveyors of perhaps the most vital commodity of the 2050s: information. Need to know who's doing what to whom? Ask a contact.
Contacts acquired during character creation are "paid" for with money available only at that time. Money spent at this stage represents the footwork normally required to hunt down a contact, establish a working relationship, and develop some degree of trust. Contacts acquired in this manner are dependable within reason. Treat them well, play them straight, and they can be trusted. A character will not get anywhere in the dicey world of Shadowrun if he doesn't trust anyone, and so a starting character is assumed to have developed a working relationship with a contact.
All characters start with two free contacts. It is also possible to acquire contacts during the game, but only through roleplaying. Characters cannot "buy" contacts once the game begins; they have to earn them the hard way.

Buddy
A buddy is one step up from a contact. Contacts trust the character, but biz is biz. Push a contact too far, and who knows what might happen. A buddy, however, is exactly what the name implies. A buddy is a friend willing to go out on a limb for the character, to take personal risks a contact would not take. A buddy can be a source of information, but will also watch a character's back, deliver messages, and do things that only friends can be trusted to do.
A character can only "buy" one buddy during character creation. The buddy must be one of the published or gamemaster-approved Archetypes, and must have Attribute, Skill, Spell, and other Ratings of 4.
Actually, a character could gain another buddy once the game begins, but that will require some heavy-duty roleplaying.

Gang or Tribe
The character may be a member of, or have close ties to, a local gang or tribe. There are 2D6 members of the gang or tribe available at any time. They come when called (arriving in 1D6 × 10 minutes) and are very loyal. All gang or tribe members have Skill and Attribute Ratings of 3.

Followers
Followers are even more loyal than buddies. They will do anything for the character, including dying if necessary (they knew the risks). Followers are also "purchased" during character creation, making a group of non-player characters available to the character. Followers can also provide information as contacts.

Followers from any five different Archetypes the player chooses are available, but only 1D6 + 1 come at any one time. (All five followers must be from different Archetypes. Five followers of the same type would be a gang!) They have the standard Archetype statistics, but the player character must supply their gear.

Acquiring followers once the game begins is the stuff of which urban legends are made.

Lifestyle
During character creation, the player must "purchase" the character's starting lifestyle. Lifestyle determines how well the character lives and it eliminates the worry of daily expenses like food, laundry, phone bills, and so on. To maintain a lifestyle once the game begins, the character must pay a certain amount of money (based on the lifestyle) per month. If the character fails to pay up, he finds himself living at the next lowest lifestyle. Lifestyles are covered in detail on p. 189, but the following list sums them up:

Street: Literally, living on the street, few or no expenses.
Squatter: One step up from the street; a synthaboard box, abandoned building, or the like.
Low: An apartment, but nothing to brag about. Just the character and the masses.
Middle: Nice house or condo, maybe even real food.
High: A high-rise luxury flat, building security, and good food on demand.
Luxury: Imagine it, chummer, just imagine it.
BUILDING A CHARACTER

Players who want to jump right into Shadowrun can simply choose one of the Archetypes, pregenerated, typical characters, provided on pp. 49–64. These characters were built using the character creation rules from this chapter. They should be used as is. It is simpler to build a new character than to alter an Archetype.

The Archetypes are good examples of what typical characters look like on paper. They are not meant to be the definitive version of a character, or even the best. They are simply characters. The gamemaster often uses Archetypes as non-player characters, while players use them as potential contacts, buddies, or followers.

Building a character from scratch in Shadowrun is relatively simple. The first step is to think about the character to be created and answer a basic question. What does the character do, and why? The answers to those questions will determine the character's priorities. For example, if the character is a magician, magic will be a high priority. The player should also decide whether the character will be a hermetic or shamanic magician; if shamanic, what totem he will follow? The totem choice is important because it will guide other choices of character creation. On the other hand, if the character is to be a samurai, decker, or rigger, then the attributes, skills, and gear important to those characters should be favored.
ALLOCATING PRIORITIES

Shadowrun uses a priority system for character generation, and it breaks down into five levels ranging from A (the most important) to E (the least important). There are also five categories of ability: Race, Magic, Attributes, Skills, and Resources. By assigning priorities to the categories, the player indicates which of the character's abilities are most important and which are less so. In other words, a player who assigns Priority A to the Magic category is saying that magic is the most important aspect of that character. If Priority A was assigned to Skills, then the character's skills would be his most important aspect.

Each of the five priorities (A, B, C, D, E) must be assigned to one of the five categories. They can be assigned in any manner, with a few restrictions. The following description of each category also describes the results of assigning various priorities to that category.
Race
Race simply determines the character's race. This category carries only one restriction, but it is a fairly big one: if the player wishes the character to be a metahuman (elf, dwarf, ork, or troll), Priority A must be assigned to the Race category. If Priority B, C, D, or E is assigned to the Race category, the character is human.

Human characters receive no special modifications or abilities, so if a player wants to create a human character, he should assign the "least important" priority, E, to the Race category.

If the player assigns Priority A to the Race category, the character can be any of the four metahuman types. The player simply chooses dwarf, elf, ork, or troll. The metahuman type chosen does matter, however, because each metahuman type has different attribute modifications and special abilities, as shown in the Racial Modifications Table. (See Attributes below for how to use these modifiers.)

RACIAL MODIFICATIONS TABLE	
Race	Modifications
Dwarf	+1 Body, -1 Quickness, +2 Strength, +1 Willpower, Thermographic Vision, Resistance (+2 Body) to disease only
Elf	+1 Quickness, +2 Charisma, Low-Light Vision
Ork	+3 Body, +2 Strength, -1 Charisma, -1 Intelligence, Low-Light Vision
Troll	+5 Body, -1 Quickness, +4 Strength, -2 Intelligence, -1 Willpower, -2 Charisma, Thermographic Vision, +1 Reach for Armed/Unarmed Combat, Dermal Armor (+1 Body)
Magic

The priority assigned to the Magic category determines if the character is a magician. If the character is human and is to be a full magician, he must assign Priority A to Magic. If the character is metahuman and is to be a magician, he assigns Priority B to Magic. Therefore, a human magician would have Priority A assigned to Magic and (most likely) Priority E assigned to the Race category. A metahuman magician would have Priority A assigned to Race and Priority B assigned to Magic.

How the priorities are assigned does not determine whether the character is a hermetic or shamanic magician. That is the player's choice.
Adepts
Adepts, magicians with limited abilities, assign priorities differently. Human adepts must assign Priority B to Magic, and metahuman adepts must assign Priority C to Magic. A human adept would assign Priority B to Magic and E to Race (note that Priority A is still available). A metahuman adept would assign Priority A to Race and Priority C to Magic (B is still available).

As with regular magicians, assigning priorities does not determine what type of adept the character becomes; that is the player's decision.
Attributes
After assigning the character's race and deciding whether or not he will be magically active, assign a priority to the Attributes category. The priority assigned determines how many Attribute Points the player may distribute to the character's six Physical and Mental Attributes (Body, Quickness, Strength, Intelligence, Willpower, and Charisma). The higher the priority assigned, the greater the number of points available. Priority A provides 30 points, B provides 24 points, C gives 20 points, D gives 17 points, and E has only 15 points.
The player now divides the Attribute Points among the six Physical and Mental Attributes. Special Attributes (Essence, Magic, Reaction) are handled differently (see below).
These points are assigned as the player wishes, keeping in mind two limitations: no character can start with an Attribute Rating higher than that listed on the Racial Maximum Table, p. 43, for that racial type, and all Attributes must have a minimum Rating of 1. Once the Attribute Points have been assigned, apply any Attribute modifiers available based on the character's Race by adding or subtracting the modifier from the allocated Attribute Points. Remember, this final Attribute Rating cannot exceed the racial maximum or be less than 1.
All characters begin with an Essence of 6. That value may decrease if the character purchases cyberware. If the character is a magician (determined by the priority assigned to the Magic category), he has a starting Magic Rating of 6. However, the Magic Rating is equal to the character's Essence, rounded down. A magician with an Essence of 3.75 would have a Magic Rating of 3.
A character's Reaction Rating is equal to the sum of his Quickness and Intelligence Ratings divided by 2 and rounded down.
Attribute Points cannot be assigned to Essence, Magic, or Reaction.
Skills
The player may allocate a number of Skill Points, based on the assigned priority, to the skills of his choice. Priority A provides 40 points, B provides 30 points, C gives 24 points, D has 20 points, and E has 17 points.

The player can choose any skills from the Skills chapter, p. 66, with the following limitation: only characters with a Magic Rating (those that received an appropriate priority for Magic) may use the Sorcery and Conjuring Skills. In this case, it often works best for the player to make a list of the skills that he or she wants the character to have, and then assign the Skill Points to the skills. There are no restrictions on the distribution of Skill Points except that no starting character may have a Skill Rating of more than 6, unless Concentrations and Specializations are assigned (see Concentrations and Specializations, p. 70, Skills).
If using Concentrations and Specializations, apply the following rules:
Any one general skill may only have one Concentration or Specialization. Each general skill can only be acquired once.
If using a Concentration, add +1 to the general Skill Rating to determine the Concentration Rating, then reduce the general Skill Rating by -1. For example, a character with 5 points allocated to the general skill of Firearms that has a Concentration in Pistols (a category of Firearms) would end up with a Firearms Skill of 4 (5 - 1) and a Pistols Concentration of 6 (5 + 1).
If specializing, add +2 to the general Skill Rating to determine the Specialization Rating, then reduce the general Skill Rating by -2. A character with a Specialization also uses the appropriate Concentration at a rating equal to the original Skill Rating. Using the same example as above, if the character had Specialization in Ares Predator (a type of pistol), he would have an Ares Predator Skill Rating of 7 (5 + 2), the Pistols Concentration of 5 (the original Skill Rating), but all other Firearms (the Skill) at 3 (5 - 2).
Special Skills may also be purchased during character generation (see p. 74), but are subject to gamemaster approval. One important Special Skill is Language. All characters know their native language at a rating equal to their Intelligence plus 2 (the total may exceed 6). Characters with a Street lifestyle (see Money below) also have a local dialect language like City Speak or Tunnel Talk at one-half their Intelligence Rating (round down). Other languages may be purchased in the same way as skills, but refer to the Languages section, p. 74, for more information.

A starting skill must have a minimum Rating of 1.

Resources
The Resources category provides two things: money to purchase cyberware, gear, and extras, and Force Points to acquire magic spells and foci. Only magicians receive Force Points, but all characters get the money. Priority A provides 1,000,000¥ and 50 Force Points, B provides 400,000¥ and 35 Force Points, C gives 90,000¥ and 25 Force Points, D has 5,000¥ and 15 Force Points, and E provides a staggering 500¥ and 5 Force Points. (What do you expect for the lowest priority?)

Money
In the world of the 2050s, all money conforms to an international unit of exchange, the nuyen (¥). Nuyen is used to purchase cyberware, gear, extras, and to pay the monetary cost of foci.
To purchase cyberware, the player selects the item from the list on p. 254, pays the cost listed, and reduces the character's Essence by the indicated amount. Remember, Essence can never fall below 0, and Magic is directly connected to Essence (see Magic, p. 116). During character generation, ignore Availability, Street Price (p. 184), and any surgery or installation costs associated with cyberware. Once the game begins, however, the player must pay these costs and take availability into consideration.
To purchase gear, simply pay the cost listed in the Gear section (pp. 254–265). Remember, however, that characters cannot start the game with any gear whose rating is higher than 6. A magician purchasing foci must pay the monetary cost of the item (p. 254), and the Bonding cost in Force Points (see below). Remember the incidentals—ammunition, body armor, cyberdecks, programs, conjuring materials, magical libraries, and so on.
To buy extras, pay the costs listed on the table below. A lifestyle must be purchased during character generation. If the player chooses not to purchase a lifestyle, that character is living on the street, like it or not. Characters can buy several months' worth of any lifestyle by paying a lump sum up front during character generation. Also remember, characters start with two free contacts.

COST OF EXTRAS	
Extra	Cost
Contact	5,000¥
Buddy	10,000¥
Gang/Tribe	50,000¥
Followers	200,000¥
Lifestyle	
Street	0¥
Squatter	100¥ per month
Low	1,000¥ per month
Middle	5,000¥ per month
High	10,000¥ per month
Luxury	100,000¥ per month
Force Points
The second type of Resource available is Force Points. Force Points are used to purchase magic spells and to acquire foci, items of magical power used by magicians. Spells are chosen in a manner similar to Skills. The player should look through the Spell Directory on pp. 151–158, choose the spells he wants his magician to know, write them down, and assign points to each spell from the Force Points total. Remember, no starting spell can have a Force greater than 6. It is also important to keep the totem modifiers (p. 119) in mind when choosing spells, because they will affect how the character is roleplayed.

Characters purchasing a focus must pay the Bonding cost (p. 137) for the item from their available Force Points. For example, if the focus costs 8 Karma to bond, the player must spend 8 Force Points, plus the monetary cost, to acquire the focus.
More Metahumans (Optional)
In the Shadowrun universe, metahumans are the minority. The character creation system reflects this by making the Metahuman Race priority very expensive compared to other priorities at the same level. This design keeps the number of metahuman shadowrunners down to something near the actual human-to-metahuman ratio within the game universe.

If gamemasters are comfortable with a higher-than-average number of metahuman player-characters in their game, they may reduce the required Metahuman Race priority from A to C, and shift the Magic priorities to A for full magicians and B for adepts in all races, human and metahuman.

This may create an unrealistic concentration of metahumans in the game (but hey, they are cooler, after all).
Allergies (Optional)
At the player's option, a metahuman character can be given an allergy during character creation. The allergy can be to a variety of substances or conditions, and of varying degrees of severity. Players should choose an allergy and then a severity from the table below.

In exchange for the allergy, the character receives some extra points in character generation. These can be in the form of Attribute, Skill, or Force Points, or additional nuyen (¥). The character can only receive the bonus from one of the associated categories, for either the allergy or the severity, but can choose different categories for each.

Consult the description of allergies and severities on p. 220 of the Critters section for more information.

ALLERGY AND SEVERITY TABLE				
Allergy	Attributes	Skills	Force	Nuyen
Uncommon				
Iron, silver	+1	+1	+1	+200¥
Common				
Plastic, pollutants, sunlight	+2	+2	+2	+400¥
Severity	Attributes	Skills	Force	Nuyen
Nuisance	—	—	—	—
Mild	+1	+2	+1	+100¥
Moderate	+2	+3	+2	+200¥
Severe	+3	+4	+3	+300¥
MASTER CHARACTER CREATION TABLE					
Priority	Race	Magic	Attributes	Skills	Resources
A	Metahuman	Human Magician	30 points	40 points	1,000,000¥ / 50
B	Human	Human Adept / Metahuman Magician	24 points	30 points	400,000¥ / 35
C	Human	Metahuman Adept	20 points	24 points	90,000¥ / 25
D	Human	—	17 points	20 points	5,000¥ / 15
E	Human	—	15 points	17 points	500¥ / 5
COMPLETING THE CHARACTER
So far, the character is just numbers. Now it's time to build on those statistics. First, make sure the character creation process is complete.

If the character is a magician, what kind? If a shaman, what is its totem? (Adepts have similar requirements.)
Are the proper priorities for Race and Magic assigned?
Have all Attribute Points been allocated and attribute modifiers from Race applied?
Have all Skill Points been allocated, and the adjustments for Concentrations and Specializations made (if used)?
Does the character have the necessary equipment, cyberware, spells, contacts, foci, and so on?
Has a lifestyle been chosen?
Starting Money
Any unspent Resource nuyen translates to money available during the game at a 10:1 ratio. If, after character generation, a character had 15,000 left, that character would start the game with 1,500¥ (15,000 ÷ 10).

All characters also start with 3D6 × 1,000¥, which can be in whatever form the player chooses.
Starting Karma
Human characters begin the game with 1 point in their Karma Pool (p. 191). Metahumans begin the game with 2 points in their Karma Pool, unless the More Metahumans optional rule (above) is in use, in which case they only get the standard 1 point. (What? You want everything?)

A new shadowrunning team starts the game with 2 points in its team Karma Pool (p. 191). Starting characters may contribute some of their starting Karma Points to team Karma if they wish.

Now, move on to the fun part.
FLESHING OUT THE CHARACTER
To really get the most enjoyment from the game, players should flesh out their character and bring it to life. Again, a character without a background is just numbers on paper.

What follows parallels the approach many authors, playwrights, and screenwriters use to flesh out a character. The responses to these questions will help players build a fuller character background, which they can continue to expand upon later.
TWENTY QUESTIONS
Each player should jot these questions down on a piece of paper and answer them, as fully as possible, for their character. Points to take into consideration and possible repercussions of a decision follow each question.

What is the character's sex?
The choice is simple: male or female, but the choice may make a difference. Biological, sociological, and, some say, psychological perspectives and needs are different in men and women. Sexism in corporate management and advancement is pretty much a thing of the past in the 2050s era, but may still exist on the streets, where attitudes are personal. What happens when the next street samurai a male character meets is female, and frighteningly sexist?
What is the character's physical size?
Is the character a tall, skinny dwarf? Or a short, stout elf? Or just average?
What is the color of the character's hair, eyes, and skin?
There's natural color, and then there's augmented color. Modern cosmetics are amazing, and used by almost everyone (both sexes) to one degree or another. What color or colors is the character's hair? How is it worn? Why? What about eye color? Is it natural? (Cybereyes can look like almost anything.) Does the character need glasses, wear contacts, or has he already had corrective surgery? What about skin color?
Metahumans come from all racial types, so yes, there are Asiatic dwarfs, negro elves, and almost every other possible race/race combination. And remember, racism in 2053 is rooted in race (human, dwarf, elf, ork, or troll) rather than skin color. (Why worry about the tanned-looking guy standing next to you on the subway when that thing over there has hands the size of your head?)
What is the character's general appearance?
Does the character stand erect or stooped? Dress anachronistically, stylishly, or inauspiciously? Look intimidating or casual? Is the character attractive? Is there something distinctive in the shape of its head, face, or limbs?
What might someone seeing the character for the first time think?
Where was the character born?
A child growing up in Seattle will have different childhood experiences than one growing up on NAN tribal lands. Heck, a child growing up in a rich neighborhood will have different experiences than one growing up a few blocks away in a poorer neighborhood. Decide into what country, state, province, city, and, if possible, neighborhood (or at least poverty level) the character was born. Many psychologists argue that what we are as adults is influenced primarily by who we were as children. Think about the character's childhood, neighborhood, friends, and family.
What is the character's age?
When a character was born is as important as where. Was the character alive before the Awakening in 2011? How about the Treaty of Denver in 2018? Or the Computer Crash of 2029? Or the Night of Rage in 2039? Or even the secession of the elven nation of Tir Tairngire from NAN four years earlier? Each of these events, and many others described in And So it Came To Pass, p. 20, changed the world. Was the character in the vicinity of any of these events, and did the event affect him or her? How did those events affect the character's family or friends?
What was the character's family?
What did the character's parents do? What was the family's means of support? Were the parents married, separated, divorced? What was family life like? Does the character have any siblings? Where are they now? What do they do? Does the character keep in contact with them? Did the character even know his birth family? If not, who or what was his surrogate family?
Has the character begun his own family?
Is the character married? Divorced? Separated? Does he have children? If not, does he want to have children?
Where or how was the character educated?
Where did the character learn his skills? Did he go to high school? Did he continue into higher education? Where? Was his schooling public, private, or corporate-sponsored? Was the character privately tutored, or did he get his lessons from the school of hard knocks?
Has the character ever done anything else for a living?
Sure, the character is shadowrunning now, but what about before? Did the character ever earn money or make a living doing something "legitimate"? Did he enjoy it? Why did the character stop doing it? Would he go back?
What about the character's political and religious beliefs?
These are sure-fire argument-starters, but what about it? Does the character have any defined political beliefs? What are those beliefs? Is the character religious? Was his family religious? Are they still? Did the character change religions, and if so, why?
What is the character's moral code?
Will the character kill? Why? When did the character decide that he could? Does he think killing is acceptable? Under what circumstances? Where does the character stand on related issues like capital punishment, abortion, and euthanasia? Does the character adhere to a personal sexual ethics code, or even think about it?
Does the character have any goals?
Is this all the character ever wants to do? Does he have any ambitions beyond the here and now? Is he satisfied with the way things are? If not, why not, and does he plan to change things? How? How long will that take, and is the character willing to wait that long?
Why does the character run the shadows?
What path led him here? Does the character run for the thrill? The money? To tweak the noses of the powers that be? As one step of a personal plan? As a political statement? Would any event or circumstance make the character stop running the shadows?
What is the character's personality?
Is the character pessimistic? Idealistic? Radical? Conservative? Resigned? Easy-going? Militant? Aloof? Intense? Bombastic? Obsessive? Superstitious? Extroverted? Introverted? Ambivalent? Rational? Opinionated? Passionate? Questioning?
What special qualities does the character possess?
This does not necessarily refer to skills, but to what the character does well. Does he get along well with people? Is he skilled at taking care of business? Prioritizing tasks? Planning ahead?
Are there certain things the character just cannot do?
Get close to people? Perceive himself realistically? Work well with others? Think clearly under stress? Handle money well?
What does the character hate?
Corporations? Orks? Shadowrunning? Personal questions? Sentimentality? The media? Her family? Certain people? Society in general?
What does the character love?
The seashore? The view from tall buildings? Quiet times? Loud music? Art? Taking care of business? A specific person? A certain place?
What is the character's name?
What was his or her birth name? What name does he use now? Did the character choose his name, or was it a nickname or joke?
THE CHARACTER RECORD SHEET
Congratulations! A character is born. Fill out the Character Record Sheet provided in the back of this book. Make photocopies of the blank sheet if needed.

The character is ready to run.

ARCHTYPES
BODYGUARD

"You blow it once in my line of work and you probably ain't never gonna work again. Who's gonna hire you if they know you blew it and a client got geeked? Reputation is everything.

If you hire me, you can trust me. My eyes see everything, my ears hear everything, but I don't remember anything you want me to forget. That's part of my job. If you don't believe me, what's the point of me working for you?

Hire me, and you can sleep easy. You're safe in my hands. Nobody gets near you, and if they try, I'll take care of them. I can play it as soft or hard as you want.

I'll do anything you say, except when the drek starts to fly. That's when you do exactly as I say. If I say jump, you jump. If I say run, you run. When your life's in danger, it's my brawl game."

Commentary: The bodyguard is a professional, and personal protection is his specialty. His job can be as boring as guarding a reclusive, housebound computer programmer, or as exciting as protecting the latest sweet young simsense star during her first whirlwind tour of Europe.

Attributes
Body: 6 (9)
Quickness: 6
Strength: 5
Charisma: 3
Intelligence: 5
Willpower: 5
Essence: 2
Reaction: 5 (9)
Initiative: 9 + 3D6
Dice Pools
Combat: 8
Cyberware
Air Filtration: 5
Dermal Plating: 3

Skillsofts:
Armed Combat: 3
Bike: 3
Electronics: 3
Rotor: 3
Winged: 3
(4) Specialized Etiquette softs at 3 points each
Skillwire: 3
Smartlink
Wired Reflexes: 2
Contacts
Choose (2) Contacts
Gear
(3) Spare Clips
Ares Predator (with smartlink, 50 rounds exploding ammo)
Armor Clothing (3/1)
Concealed Holster
DocWagon Contract (Gold)
High Lifestyle (2 months prepaid)
Lined Coat (4/2)
Pocket Secretary
Portable Phone (ear/booster)
Tres Chic Clothing
Starting Cash: 11,474¥

COMBAT MAGE
"No one argues that the samurai is lord of the physical street, but if you view that as the sum of existence, you are not long for this world.

I am not the average mage. Though I'm interested in all matters arcane, my passion lies in the application of those mystical theories. My lifestyle is expensive, for I cherish all the finer things. One could not enjoy the life I do by poring endlessly through myriad dusty tomes.

I never worry about money, for my services are most useful to those who can pay me what I am worth."

Commentary: The combat mage is from that elite group of magicians dedicated to applying their magic martially. In a firefight, his sudden appearance can tip the balance. The combat mage is a lean, powerful fighting machine, and more than a match for most samurai. It would be foolish, however, for a combat mage to take on a samurai head-to-head. Guile and subterfuge will always be his most powerful tools.

Attributes
Body: 2 (3)
Quickness: 4
Strength: 2
Charisma: 2
Intelligence: 5
Willpower: 5
Essence: 5.8
Magic: 5 (7)
Reaction: 4
Initiative: 4 + 1D6
Dice Pools
Combat: 7 (9)
Magic: 6 (8)
Cyberware
Cybereyes with Thermographic and Low-Light
Contacts
Choose (2) Contacts
Gear
Armor Jacket (5/3)
DocWagon Contract (Gold)
HK227 SMG (w/laser sight and 50 rounds regular ammo)
Middle Lifestyle (1 month prepaid)
Power Focus (2)
Spell Lock (Armor/2 successes)
Spell Lock (Personal Combat Sense/4 successes)
Spells
Combat:
Manaball: 4
Mana Bolt: 4
Power Bolt: 3
Detection:
Clairvoyance: 3
Detect Enemies: 2
Personal Combat Sense: 5
Health:
Heal: 3
Increase Reaction (+2): 2
Manipulation:
Armor: 3
Confusion: 3
Starting Cash: 14,100¥

DECKER
"Technomancer, that's what I am. A wizard with technology, not that fuzzy mumbo-jumbo razz. The mighty computer is at my command, trembling to perform my least wish.

You want some ice cracked, I'm your girl. I've got programs to slide past the best. You got a shadowrun? No sweat. I've done 'em, and come away clean, too. Ain't no corp tracer or groundhound gonna pick up my trail. I hit 'em sharp and hard, then I'm away and running, a ghost in the Grid. The only touch they'll ever make is my street name, and I'll only let 'em have that if I feel like it.

You'd better have plenty on your credstick, chummer. I ain't cheap. I'm a big leaguer, not some junkyen runner. I'm slick and I'm fast, the cutting edge. The Matrix is my home, and I wouldn't have it any other way. You ain't alive till you've jacked in and seen the electron horizon in cyberspace. I'm going places.

Maybe you've heard of FastJack? Well, forget him! I'm the hot new decker on the Grid, and I'm gonna put him in the history banks."

Commentary: The decker is a console cowgirl, a descendant of the computer hacker of the latter part of the 20th century. She jacks into the Matrix to manipulate the dataflows to her own ends while seeking the big score or the trick that will snug her firmly into the annals of the technomancers. She skirts the edges of legality, overstepping them more than occasionally.

Attributes
Body: 2
Quickness: 4
Strength: 3
Charisma: 1
Intelligence: 6
Willpower: 4
Essence: 5.5
Reaction: 5 (7)*
Initiative: 5 (7)* + 1D6 (2D6)*
Dice Pools
Combat: 7
Hacking: 11 (13)*
Cyberware
Datajack
Headware Memory (30 Mp)
Contacts
Choose (2) Contacts
Gear
Fuchi Cyber-4 (with Response Increase 1)

Programs:
Bod: 5
Evasion: 4
Masking: 4
Sensors: 5
Attack: 6
Browse: 4
Deception: 4
Microtronics Workshop: Table-top Personal Computer (100 Mp)
Yamaha Rapier
Ruger Super Warhawk (with 10 regular rounds)
Middle Lifestyle
Starting Cash: 10,860¥

*Applies in the Matrix only.

DETECTIVE
"They told me you were looking for me. Well, you found me. So turn on the sob story. I got the time. But first, tickle my comp with your credstick. I may have the time, but I haven't got the interest until I know you've got the nuyen. Time takes money, chummer. Just flick the stick into the slot. The box will dump my rates and sheet onto your stick.

The sheet will give you the highlights of my illustrious career: maidens rescued (extra charge for preserving original status), the lost found, the necessary lost, but I don't do erasures. No point in going on. I see by your eyes you've already scanned the sheet. Charlie at the precinct, or did Stevie the Snitch pass it on? Don't really matter. If somebody hadn't given you my name, you wouldn't be looking for me.

Now before we go any further, let me check the cred balance. Whew! You got my interest, all right. What's the job?"

Commentary: The detective leads a hard life, balanced between the shadows of crime and the harsh glare of corporate and city life. To keep his own code of honor and justice intact, he makes constant compromises to get through the day, or the night. He won't touch magic, though his cases often involve it, and he won't augment his body, though sometimes his resolve puts him at a disadvantage. He'll tell you that a man has to stand on his own feet.

Attributes
Body: 4
Quickness: 4
Strength: 3
Charisma: 3
Intelligence: 6
Willpower: 4
Essence: 6
Reaction: 5
Initiative: 5 + 1D6
Dice Pools
Combat: 7
Cyberware
None
Contacts
Choose (6) Contacts
Gear
Ares Predator (with 10 rounds)
Armor Vest (2/1)
Ford Americar (weather-beaten)
Low Lifestyle (1 month prepaid)
Micro-Recorder
Sony Pocket Secretary
Walther Palm Pistol (with 10 rounds)
Starting Cash: 12,311¥

DWARF MERCENARY
"Oh, har-har, I get it. That was a joke, right? I've got news for you, chummer. When I pull the trigger on my FN-HAR, I ain't gonna be the one knocked across the room.
If it's been a hot spot, I've vacationed there. Got the tan and the scars to prove it. Wanna see my passport? Which one?

You've got my last six personal efficiency reports in front of ya, with not a smudge of red ink on any of them. They're certified. If I'd doctored them, you'd know about it. Keep questioning my integrity, though, and they'll be covered in red.

You know my rates. We got a deal or what?"

Commentary: The dwarf mercenary, though a rarity among the corporate armies of the world, is nonetheless a stalwart professional. His size is an advantage in rough terrain where a normal-sized merc would get bogged down or hung up. Too many short jokes, however, and he'll hang you out to die.
ELVEN DECKER
"They say the Awakened have no touch for technology. Well, short, squat, and ill-favored, don't believe everything you hear on the street. I am living proof that a metahuman, especially an elf, can ride the Matrix and bend it to his will.

I am a technomancer, and there isn't a drop of the Rain Dance in the magic I do. My spells are programs, offering reliability no spellworm can boast. My wand is my datajack, portal to the glittering scenery of the Matrix. My conjurings are electrons slaved to my will under the drivers of my elegant and sophisticated software. You will find no better.

So, tell me what it is you wish me to do. If it piques my interest, I will essay the task and complete it to my satisfaction, which shall certainly exceed your requirements.

There will, of course, be a fee."

Commentary: The elven decker seems, at first, a contradiction in terms. He is living proof that metahumans cannot be stereotyped, and he will be the first to tell you that not all elves live in the woods. Magic has no attraction for him, and although he has the superior attitude of his brethren in the wilderness, he has little use for their customs and practices. He is happy living in the modern technical world.

Attributes
Body: 2
Quickness: 5
Strength: 2
Charisma: 3 [Corrected from "Inserness"; likely OCR error for Charisma, based on context and Racial Modifications Table for Elves (+2 Charisma)]
Intelligence: 5
Willpower: 4
Essence: 5.5
Reaction: 5 (7)*
Initiative: 5 (7)* + 1D6 (2D6)*
Dice Pools
Combat: 7
Hacking: 10 (12)*
Cyberware
Datajack
Headware Memory (30 Mp)
Contacts
Choose (2) Contacts
Gear
Fuchi Cyber-4 (with Response Increase 1)

Programs:

Bod: 5
Evasion: 4
Masking: 4
Sensors: 5
Attack: 6
Browse: 4
Deception: 4
Microtronics Workshop: Table-top Personal Computer (100 Mp)
Yamaha Rapier
Ruger Super Warhawk (with 10 regular rounds)
Middle Lifestyle
Starting Cash: 10,860¥

Notes: Natural low-light eyes.

*Applies only in the Matrix.
FORMER COMPANY MAN
"Let's get one thing understood. I'm a freelancer. I don't work for them anymore. I don't care what you heard about the dust-up over at Aztechnology last month. That wasn't me. I'm a pro. Only amateurs make that big a noise. Besides, nobody saw me.

So you're looking for somebody who can do a job and keep his mouth shut? You don't have to look any further. I did a good job for them, and I'll do the same for you. We'll get along just fine as long as you remember one thing: I don't talk about them. Ever. That kind of talk is more trouble than a Beretta full-auto flechette gun shoved in your belly.

I did learn one thing when I was working the corp. You don't play without a little quid pro quo, ya know. If I can't do it for you, I know somebody who can. So let's talk price and details. I'm sure we can come to a working arrangement."

Commentary: The former company man has had his eyes opened to the nature of the corporation he served for so long. Disgusted by the corruption he uncovered, he quit. He is still haunted by his former employers and deeds, but is trying to bury the past. Making a new life is hard. He has little to offer except the skills he used in the company's behalf. He doesn't like it, but he uses them. Some day, he'll retire completely.

Attributes
Body: 4
Quickness: 4 (5)
Strength: 4 (5)
Charisma: 2
Intelligence: 3
Willpower: 3
Essence: 1.3
Reaction: 4 (8)
Initiative: 8 + 3D6
Dice Pools
Combat: 5
Cyberware
Datajack
Muscle Replacement (1)
Smartgun Link
Wired Reflexes (2)
Contacts
Choose (2) Contacts
Gear
Armor Clothing (3/0)
Armor Jacket (5/3)
Bug Scanner (4)
Earplug Phone with Booster
Eurocar Westwind 2000
Fichetti Pistol (with internal smartlink, 100 regular rounds)
HK227 SMG (with internal smartlink, 100 regular rounds)
Jammer (4)
Low-Light Goggles
Medkit
Survival Kit
(2) Tranq Patch (5)
Trauma Patch
White Noise Generator (6)
Starting Cash: 17,780¥

FORMER WAGE MAGE
"You would do well to withdraw your questions as to why I left my former employ. I will not satisfy your curiosity. Ask my old boss if you want to know.

But let us not sour a mutually profitable arrangement over such trivia. While my refusal to speak of the past may seem inconvenient and perhaps a trifle disconcerting, I assure you that I bring no tail behind me. I am a free agent, and am quite capable of keeping any threads from my past from tangling your schemes.

We are all aware of the state of the world and the changes that are the legacy of our grandfathers' time. I assume that your concerns touch on some of these changes, at least in part. You need a competent mage, well-versed in the fine points of magic.

Tell me your problem. Once I know what it is, I can begin to solve it."

Commentary: The former wage mage has had her eyes opened to the nature of the corporation she served for so long. Disgusted by the corruption she uncovered, she quit. She is still haunted by her former employers and the perversion of the magic she performed for their benefit. She wants to forget the past and make a new life. She has the skills she used in the company's behalf and uses them, more positively she hopes, to do good. Some day, the scales will be balanced, and she will be able to rest.

Attributes
Strength: 1
Quickness: 3
Body: 2
Charisma: 1
Intelligence: 6
Willpower: 4
Essence: 6
Magic: 6
Reaction: 4
Initiative: 4 + 1D6
Dice Pools
Combat: 6
Magic: 6
Cyberware
None
Contacts
Choose (2) Contacts
Gear
Armor Clothing (3/0)
Computer Media Hermetic Library

Conjuring: 3
Magical Theory: 3
Sorcery: 3
Data Display with 60 Mp of storage
Ruger Super Warhawk (w/10 rounds of ammo)
Spells

Choose one orientation from the following:

Healer:

Antidote M Toxin: 2
Cure M Disease: 4
Detox M Toxin: 3
Heal: 6
Hibernate: 4
Treat: 6
Prowler:
Analyze Device: 5
Chaotic World: 5
Clairvoyance: 4
Entertainment: 3
Mask: 3
Sleep: 5
Starting Cash: 11,100¥

GANG MEMBER
"You don't look so tough to me, but that's okay. Whadd'ya expect from some liner who ain't run with my gang? You looking for tough? You got it right here.

There's only one real power in this part of the 'plex. We know the streets, and the people know us. This is our turf. Gang turf! And we protect it. You want a piece of us, you know where to find us. That is, if you're stupid enough to try.

Anything you need on the street, you come to me. Just remember, you burn me, the gang burns you. Simple law of the 'plex, chummer. We take care of our own."

Commentary: The gang member may be young, but he is old in the ways of life in the metroplex. He is a survivor, a predator of the concrete jungle. He is tough, smart, and confident.


MERCENARY
"We're all businessmen, right? We both work for a living, don't we? I got bills to pay, just like you. Only difference is, you work with a cyberdeck. I work with an Uzi III.

Look, my record's good. Three years in the corp's first-run circuit and a clean two with the Aztlan Third Legion. No demotions or discipline problems logged in my jacket. Huh? Don't give me that stuff about doctored records. I'm telling you my record's clean. I can do your job quiet, or I can do it loud. Either way, I'll get results, and that's what you want, isn't it?

Thought so. Now, let's talk price."

Commentary: The merc is a tough veteran who has seen combat in every corner of the world. He'll work for the corp, the policlubs, a petty dictator, or a noble revolution, as long as he gets paid. The contract is all that matters. Receiving payment on a job has never been a problem for him. No employer would dare to renege on a merc contract.

Attributes
Body: 5
Quickness: 4
Strength: 5
Charisma: 3
Intelligence: 4
Willpower: 3
Essence: 3.4
Reaction: 4 (6)
Initiative: 6 + 2D6
Dice Pools
Combat: 5
Cyberware
Cybereyes with Low-Light
Radio Receiver
Wired Reflexes: 1
Contacts
Choose (2) Contacts
Gear
Ares Predator (with external smartlink, 20 rounds regular ammo)
Armor Jacket (5/3)
Ingram Valiant LMG (with external smartlink, 100 rounds regular ammo)
Knife
Smart Goggles
Throwing Knife
Starting Cash: 12,750¥
RIGGER
"We were screaming down the dunes when Oldfield's t-bird lifted skirts. Fool thought we had cleared the sight line for their AVMs. Paid for his stupidity. Cost the company two mil on that bird. Oldfield never could slide her down the path the way a rigger's got to. We pulled it out, though. I canceled the rocket team with a twitch of the old trigger muscle and roared my turtle past their sec teams and scrambled the reins before they could hit the main force. Got a nice bonus for that scrap. Good ratings on the first-run circuit, too. Old EBM2 appreciates quality workmanship. Just wanted you to understand what kind of quality you're talking to here.

Most people don't understand us riggers. Never will, I suppose. You just have to feel it, the adrenalin rush when you rev the old turbines, the air howling over your hull. Ain't nothing like it."

Commentary: The rigger is a specialized breed of console cowgirl. She trades all normal sensations for the input of a cybernetic link-up, typically to a vehicle or a security system. Jacked into her vehicle, the revving of the engine becomes her heartbeat, and the flow of fuel the adrenalin rush. Here she is one with her machine; yet at the end of a run she can separate her perceptions from the machine and walk away without giving it another thought.

Attributes
Body: 5
Quickness: 6
Strength: 4
Charisma: 4
Intelligence: 6
Willpower: 6
Essence: 1.35
Reaction: 6 (10)*
Initiative: 6 (10)* + 1D6 (3D6)*
Dice Pools
Combat: 8
Control: 6 (10)*
Cyberware
Cybereyes with Low-Light, Flare Protection, and Thermographic Imaging
Datajack
Radio
Smartlink
Vehicle Control Rig: 2
Contacts
Choose (2) Contacts
Gear
(2) Surveillance Drones (rigged, with remote gear)
Ares Predator (with external smartlink, 20 rounds regular ammo)
Armor Jacket (5/3)
DocWagon Contract (Platinum)
Eurocar Westwind 2000 (rigged, with concealed LMG, 1,000 rounds of belted ammo, and a two-shot Missile Launcher (2 AVMs))
Hunter-Spotter Drone (with 2 LMGs and 1,000 rounds of regular belted ammo, remote gear, rigged)
Middle Lifestyle
Patrol Vehicle (with 2 LMGs and 1,000 rounds of regular belt-fed ammo; remote gear)
Remote Control Deck (with three slave ports)

Starting Cash: 10,315¥
*Applies only when rigged.

SHAMAN
"I am the one you seek. Step closer. Do not be afraid. My medicine is strong, but you will not be harmed if you have no evil intentions toward me.

I knew you were coming. My totem whispered it to me. It is always need that brings them to me. Speak of your desire, that I may gauge your intent.

If your desire is in accord with the land and the spirits, I can help you. Those who aid and guide me can then be called to come to your aid. There will be a price, but it shall be a just price suited to what is done and what you can pay."

Commentary: The shaman treads the path of the spirits. Festooned with fetishes and the implements of his trade, he walks the land, in tune with its spirit and seeking to preserve its harmony. More than the ordinary mage, he abhors the encroachment of technology, especially that which invades the body.

Attributes
Body: 3
Quickness: 3
Strength: 3
Charisma: 5
Intelligence: 4
Willpower: 6
Essence: 6
Magic: 6
Reaction: 3
Initiative: 3 + 1D6
Dice Pools
Combat: 6
Magic: 5
Cyberware
None
Contacts
Choose (2) Contacts
Gear
Knife
Leather Clothing (0/2)
Medicine Lodge Materials: 2
Street Lifestyle
Spells
Choose one of the following orientations:

Fighter:
Mana Bolt: 4
Powerball: 6
Chaos: 4
Sleep: 5
Confusion: 5
Health:
Heal: 6
Hibernate: 4
Treat: 5
Entertainment: 3
Mask: 3
Detector:
Analyze Device: 4
Clairvoyance: 3
Detect Enemies: 3
Detect Magic: 5
Starting Cash: 10,315¥

Note: A shaman must select a wilderness totem. See the Magic chapter for details.

SKILLS
If you did it and lived, then you probably did it right. —JKW, Freelancer
When trying to accomplish something more refined than lifting a load, spotting an ambush, or running for cover, a character will normally use a skill. Shadowrun skills are groups of closely related techniques and knowledge, not narrow, limiting areas of function. The game takes this approach in an attempt to keep down the number of statistics. If a character uses Concentrations and Specializations, he or she has increased capability in that specialized area, but at the cost of reduced ability in the rest of the functions covered by the general skill.
SKILL RATINGS
Skill ratings begin at a level of 1. There is no maximum rating, but players will find it increasingly difficult to raise their character’s skill ratings as the character improves in a particular skill. Beginning characters may not start with any skill at a rating higher than 6. Characters with no rating in a skill are considered untrained, but they may still attempt to perform a function covered by a skill in one of two ways: by using a related skill or by defaulting to an attribute. To do so, they must use the Skill Web, on p. 69.
SUCCESS TESTS
The rules make frequent reference to Success Tests. To make a Success Test for a skill, use the numerical rating of the skill named for the test as the number of six-sided dice to roll. Each individual die result that equals or exceeds the specified target number is a success. Usually one success is enough to indicate that the character has passed the test.
There are two kinds of tests. In a success test, the character is attempting to accomplish something without any interference. Roll the dice as described above; successes determine the effect of the skill’s use. Often, when one character is attempting to attack another character (or object), the target also makes a standard test and uses his or her successes to offset those the attacker rolled. Exactly how those successes are offset varies with the type of attack.
In an opposed test, two characters use the same skill, or an opposing skill, against one another, with only one of them able to actually succeed in the effort. Usually, the character generating the greater number of successes achieves his goal. Negotiation is a typical situation for this type of test.
Using the Skill Success Table as a guide, the Gamemaster determines the target number necessary for success. The rules usually specify a target number for specific skill uses. Circumstances and conditions (bad weather, stress, and so on) can change the target number.
Tests for Attributes are handled in the exact same manner as for skills, where the number of dice rolled is based on the Attribute Rating.
SKILL SUCCESS TABLE
Difficulty		Target Number
Simple			2
Routine		3
Average		4
Challenging		5
Difficult			6–7
Strenuous		8
Extreme		9
Nearly Impossible	10+
TAKING THE TIME
Characters sometimes use skills and Attributes for activities that do not have immediate results, such as fixing a car, building something, and so on. The Gamemaster determines how long such a task should take. This number is known as the base time. The total successes rolled in the Skill Test (each die that equals or exceeds the target number) are divided into the base time, with fractions rounded to the nearest whole time unit (2.66 hours counts as 3 hours). Thus, if a job typically takes 10 hours (the base time), and the character rolls 3 successes (10 ÷ 3 = 3.3), the task would take three hours.
Fastjack slipped the chip-puller back into its slot in his microtronics tool kit, gave it a pat, and smiled. He had just finished repairing the telecom for Sally Tsung in record time.
Fastjack, the legendary decker, has just finished a task using his Electronics (Build/Repair) Skill, which has a Rating of 7. The Gamemaster had assigned a base time of 10 hours for the job, based on his assessment of the modifications Fastjack wanted to include and a Target Number of 4. The decker rolled successes with 4 of his 7 dice (10 ÷ 4 = 2.5, which rounds up to 3). He finishes the job in three hours.
THE SKILL WEB
Almost every skill is related to one or more other skills by a network of relationships called the Skill Web. Using the web allows characters with one skill to better perform functions properly belonging to another skill. They will, of course, not be as likely to succeed at their task as someone who has the proper skill.
There are two ways to use the Skill Web: by using a related skill or defaulting to an Attribute.
When using a related skill, trace a path from the desired skill to one in which the character has a rating. It is not necessary to trace the shortest path. Count the number of circles passed, with each circle increasing the target number by +2.
When defaulting to an Attribute, go to the desired Attribute’s position on the web and trace a path from it to the listing for the desired skill. Again, each circle passed in tracing the path adds an additional +2 to the target number. (No one ever said it would be easy.)
It is only possible to trace a path in the direction of the arrows. If a player encounters an arrow pointing in a direction opposite to the path he or she is tracing when moving from skill to skill, or Attribute to skill, that path is blocked. He must find another way. Some skills simply do not connect to other skills or to some Attributes.
CONCENTRATIONS AND SPECIALIZATIONS
Players have the option of giving their character a Concentration in a particular form of a skill, i.e., the character has spent most of his or her study and practice time on mastering that form of the skill. By narrowing his focus this way, the character obviously cannot give as much attention to related forms. For example, two characters who have the same ratings in Stealth will have different effective ratings if one of them Concentrates in Stealth (Urban). The urban fellow will be better than the other guy on the city streets, but worse in the wilderness.
Characters who have Concentrated in a skill have that skill at one point higher than the general skill that normally governs it. At the same time, the rating of the general skill is reduced by 1. For example, a character with a Firearms (the general skill) Rating of 5, who has Concentrated in Submachine Guns (SMG) (one of the possible Concentrations) ends up with an SMG Rating of 6 (5 + 1) and a Firearms Rating of 4 (5 - 1). Thus, any time the character uses an SMG, the player rolls 6 dice. If the character uses another type of firearm (rifle, pistol, and so on), he would only roll four dice.
Specialization takes the process one step further, narrowing the character’s skill to a particular item or activity. Use of a Specialized skill adds +2 to the original general skill rating (which, in turn, is reduced by 2 points). At the same time, the character gains a Concentration governing the Specialization at a rating equal to the original general skill rating. If the character in the above example Specialized in Uzi III (a type of SMG), he would have ended up with a Uzi III Rating of 7, an SMG Rating of 5 (the Concentration equal to the original rating), and Firearms Skill Rating of 3.
A Specialization is usually listed in parentheses after the skill name. All these numerical gymnastics are relevant only during character creation, when players are determining their characters’ starting skills (see p. 45). Once the game has begun, skill advancement is handled according to the Karma rules on p. 190. Starting characters are allowed only one Concentration and one Specialization per skill. When referring to the Skill Web, use only the general skill rating, never a Concentration or Specialization rating.
SKILL CATEGORIES
Shadowrun groups skills into five broad categories: Active, Build and Repair, Knowledge, Languages, and Special Skills. All have ratings that improve as the character becomes more experienced. The description of each skill includes a list of suggested Concentrations. Players can create others subject to Gamemaster approval. Possible Specializations appear in parentheses after the Concentration name. Other Specializations can also be created with the Gamemaster’s approval.
Active Skills 
Active Skills usually apply toward achieving a specific, short-term result such as hitting a target with a weapon, performing a difficult maneuver in a vehicle, climbing a wall, casting a spell, and so forth. These skills also involve some form of active, physical activity. An Active Skill includes maintenance of equipment commonly needed to use the skill and includes the user’s understanding of the skill’s application. An Active Skill does not include the ability to design new equipment. To simplify the use of the Skill Web, active skills are arranged into groups, which makes it easier to see which skills are related.
Combat Skills 
Most Combat Skills have the designation “SW” in parenthesis. This means that the character can choose to Specialize in any specific weapon (SW) from the Concentration group.
Armed Combat Armed Combat Skill governs the use of hand-held melee weapons. Concentrations: Edged Weapons (SW), Pole Arms/Staff (SW), Whips/Flails (SW), Clubs (SW)
Unarmed Combat Unarmed Combat Skill governs the use of martial arts techniques and implant weapons. A Concentration for Martial Arts Style (with a Specialization for specific techniques) is listed below. This Concentration (e.g., tae kwon do) and Specialization (hand strikes) is only appropriate for use in the game when both the player and Gamemaster understand the specifics of the desired style, including its forms and limitations. Concentrations: Subduing Combat, Cyber-Implant Weaponry (SW), Martial Arts Style (Specific Technique)
Demolition Demolition Skill governs the preparation, measuring, and setting of chemical explosives. Concentrations: Commercial Explosives, Plastic Explosives
Firearms Firearms Skill governs the use of all types of firearms, from pistols to grenade launchers. Concentrations: Pistols (SW), Rifles (SW), Submachine Guns (SW), Light Machine Guns (SW), Grenade Launchers (SW), Tasers (SW)
Gunnery Gunnery Skill governs the use of heavy weapons, whether on tripods, vehicle mounts, pintles, or in fixed emplacements. Concentrations: Machine Guns (SW), Missile/Rocket Launchers (SW), Assault Cannon (SW), Vehicle-Mounted Cannon (SW)
Projectile Weapons Projectile Weapons govern the use of muscle-powered projectile weapons. Concentrations: Bows (SW), Crossbows (SW)
Throwing Weapons Throwing Weapons govern the use of weapons thrown by the user. Concentrations: Shafted (SW), Non-Aerodynamic (Grenades, Knives), Aerodynamic (Shuriken, Airfoil Grenades)
Physical Skills 
Physical Skills require agility and general body control, strength, and stamina. A character’s load has a large effect on his Physical Skills. See Behind the Scenes, p. 185, for more details.
Athletics Athletics Skill governs exceptional training in a particular aspect of physical endeavor. Specialization involves increasing one’s Concentration, rather than working in a specific form. Thus, a character Specializing in Climbing applies +2 to his Athletics Rating when climbing and -2 when using a different Athletics Concentration. Concentrations: Running, Climbing, Lifting, Jumping, Swimming
Stealth Stealth Skill governs sneaking around, moving quietly, tracking (and covering one’s tracks), secretly trailing another character, or giving a tail the shake. Each aspect of the skill may become a Specialization for any environmental Concentration. Concentrations: Urban (by aspect), Wilderness (by aspect), Farmland (by aspect)
Technical Skills
Technical Skills deal with all types of machines, including electronics and those implanted into the body.
Biotech Biotech Skill governs basic medicine, first aid, and implant operations. A character with this skill understands basic medicine in a hands-on sense, as a paramedic rather than a physician. Though familiar with the techniques and materials of cyberware, a character with this skill would still need a computer expert to collaborate on the interface systems. Concentrations: Transimplant Surgery (Headware, Bodyware, Organic Replacements), Organ Culture (by organ or limb), Replacement Construction (by organ or limb), Extended Care, First Aid
Computer Computer Skill governs the use and understanding of computer technology and programming. This skill is absolutely essential to anyone who wishes to jack into cyberspace and run the Matrix. Concentrations: Hardware (Mainframes, Micros, Interface Tech, Implant Tech), Software (Decking, Matrix Programming, Non-Matrix Programming, Interface Programming, Implant Programming)
Electronics Electronics Skill governs the use and understanding of electronic devices, which, in the 2050s, is most everything in common use in a city. Specialization involves increasing the depth of Concentration, as in Athletics. Thus, Specializing in Maglocks applies a +2 to that Concentration but a -2 to all other Electronics Concentrations. Concentrations: Control Systems, Electronic Warfare, Maglocks, Linking between Devices, Diagnostics
Magical Skills 
Anyone may study Magical Skills for the inherent knowledge, but only a Magician can use these skills to manipulate magical energy. See the Magic Chapter, p. 116, for full details.
Conjuring Conjuring Skill governs the calling and banishing of spirit powers. Only Mages can call elementals, and only Shamans can call nature spirits. Concentrations: Elemental (Type), Nature Spirit (Type)
Sorcery Sorcery Skill governs the control of magical energy in the form of spells. Concentrations: Spellcasting (by Spell Category), Ritual Sorcery (by Spell Category)
Social Skills 
Social Skills concern the interaction of the player characters and non-player characters. For interaction among player characters, the players should rely on their real social skills, though they can request, or the Gamemaster insist, that the actual interaction be backed up with a skill test.
Etiquette Etiquette is a special kind of skill that requires a Concentration. Each Concentration represents a particular subculture. Etiquette Skill allows a character to function within the subculture without appearing out of place. It also allows the character to recognize prominent figures within the subculture and to have a general idea of their strengths, weaknesses, likes, and dislikes. Attempting to manipulate someone within a subculture by using Etiquette Skill uses the subject’s Charisma Rating as a target number.
Specializations of Etiquette differ with the subcultures. A Concentration of Etiquette (Street) would have Specializations in each gang, criminal elements, and so on. Particular tribes, specific tribal interests, or inter-tribal politics would be appropriate Specializations for Etiquette (Tribal). Particular corporations, corporate hirelings, and inter-corporate relations apply to Etiquette (Corporate). Concentrations: Corporate, Matrix, Media, Street, Tribal
Interrogation Interrogation Skill governs the extraction of information from an unwilling subject. It uses the subject’s Willpower Rating as a target number. It is usually ineffective when applied against more than a single subject at a time. Concentrations: Verbal, Machine-Aided (Lie Detectors, Voice-Stress Analysis)
Leadership Leadership Skill governs a character’s ability to get others to do his bidding through the exercise of example and authority. It includes an aspect of problem-solving, but is not intended to substitute for clear thinking and good planning on the part of the players. Leadership skill uses the subject’s Intelligence Rating as a target number. Concentrations: Political, Military, Commercial (Specializations for each Concentration include Strategy (general plans), Tactics (topical plans), and Morale)
Negotiation Negotiation Skill governs any interactions in which each side seeks to come out ahead, either through careful and deliberate bartering or through fast talk. It uses the adversary’s Willpower Rating as a target number. Concentrations: Bargain, Bribe, Fast Talk
Vehicle Skills 
The type of vehicle in use and the driver’s familiarity with it affect the chance of success when a character attempts a difficult maneuver or takes the vehicle through difficult terrain and conditions. Ordinary operation of the vehicle requires no die roll. In fact, many 21st-century vehicles can operate almost on their own. Most Vehicle Skills have a Concentration of Remote Operation. This refers to vehicles whose operator is not present during the vehicle’s operation. The vehicle responds to transmitted orders. Specialization in a Remote Operation Concentration specifies a Concentration category, not a specific vehicle (SV).
Bike Bike Skill governs the use of all motorcycles, motortrikes, and bikes with sidecars. Concentrations: Two-wheeler (SV), Three-wheeler (SV), Racing (SV)
Car Car Skill refers to a motor vehicle with four or more wheels. Concentrations: Passenger Vehicle (SV), Truck (SV), Racing (SV), Remote Operation (Category)
Hovercraft Hovercraft Skill governs all hover vehicles, regardless of their purpose. Concentrations: Passenger Craft (SV), Transport Craft (SV), Racing (SV), Remote Operation (Category)
Motorboat Motorboat Skill refers to any motorized watercraft. Concentrations: Pleasure Craft (SV), Transport (SV), Racing (SV), Remote Operation (Category)
Rotor Craft Rotor Craft Skill refers to fixed- and tilt-rotor aircraft. Concentrations: Tilt-Rotor (SV), Fixed-Rotor (SV), Remote Operation (Category)
Sailboat Sailboat Skill governs the control of sail-powered watercraft. Concentrations: Pleasure Craft (SV), Transport (SV), Racing (SV)
Vectored Thrust Vectored Thrust Skill encompasses aircraft relying on vectored thrust for lift and propulsion. This includes low-altitude vehicles (known colloquially as thunderbirds), military craft that use this motive power but do not normally operate at altitude because of their heavy loads or armor and armament. Concentrations: Vertical Take-Off and Landing (SV), LAV Craft (SV), Remote Operation (Category)
Winged Plane Winged Plane Skill governs the control of fixed- or swing-wing aircraft (jet, prop, or turbo prop) and unpowered aircraft. Concentrations: Gliders (SV), Jets (SV), Propellers (SV), Racing (SV), Remote Operation (Category)
BUILD AND REPAIR SKILLS 
There is a corresponding Build/Repair (B/R) Skill for many of the Active Skills. The B/R counterpart implies the character’s access to the tools and/or equipment commonly used in that skill area. Thus, Armed Combat (B/R) allows a character to make or repair swords and other melee weapons. Ground Vehicles (B/R) allows him to repair a car, a bike, or a hovercraft equally well.
The character still needs time, tools, and materials to build something from scratch. Even a character with superb levels of skill can do little without the proper equipment. If the character is trying to build something new, he or she also needs theoretical knowledge to design the item, unless someone else provides a detailed blueprint for its construction. See Behind the Scenes for details on how to use Build and Repair Skills.
Concentrations for Build/Repair Skills refer to types of equipment when they relate to named skills, and to the category of equipment when they apply to groups of skills. Thus, a Concentration in Armed Combat (B/R) works for Edged Weapons but not for other melee weapons, and a Concentration in Ground Vehicles (B/R) might be Bikes, but not include Car and Hovercraft.
If a Build/Repair Skill is available, it will be to the general skill, and separated by only one circle on the Skill Web.
KNOWLEDGE SKILLS
Knowledge Skills give a character access to specific information. This is especially useful when the character is an expert in a field in which the player is ignorant. Many Knowledge Skills also provide the character with the theoretical basis of actions related to the field of study and the basis for new designs in an area.
Biology Biology Skill covers the general life sciences. Specializations include all the specific branches of each discipline, which are too numerous to list here. Concentrations: Zoology, Botany, Medicine, Parazoology, Parabotany
Computer Theory Computer Theory Skill governs computer design and architecture. Concentrations: Hardware (Mainframes, Micros, Interface Tech, Implant Tech), Software (Decking, Matrix Programming, Non-Matrix Programming, Interface Programming, Implant Programming), Matrix Theory
Cybertechnology Cybertechnology Skill covers the design of implant and cybernetic control technology. Specializations are available for specific devices (SD). Concentrations: Headware (SD), Bodyware (SD)
Magical Theory Magical Theory includes a general understanding of the functions and functioning of magic. It is vital in the design of new spells. Concentrations: Design (Shamanic, Hermetic), History (by Continent)
Military Theory Military Theory covers theoretical studies of men in combat and military organizations. Concentrations: Military History (by continent or period), Tactics (Air, Land, Sea)
Physical Sciences 
This skill includes engineering as well as the physical sciences. Specializations are the various branches of each discipline, which are too numerous to list here. Concentrations: Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, Geology
Psychology Psychology includes the behavioral science in its analytical and predictive forms. Specializations are for specific types of behavior and personality types. Concentrations: Individual Behavior, Group Behavior, Deviant Behavior
Sociology Sociology covers historical and observational sciences concerning humans and human interactions. Specializations are by continent or culture. Concentrations: History, Anthropology, Archaeology
LANGUAGE SKILLS 
Language Skills are an exception to the basic skills rule because each specific language is a Specialization of a family of languages. Thus, a character will have some facility with languages related to his specific language, but will not be fluent in additional languages within that family unless he or she also acquires Specializations in those languages. Different language families are not considered to be related.
When language Specializations are taken as part of character generation, the Specialization Ratings automatically increase by +2. The language family, as the equivalent of the general skill, would have a skill rating of 4 less than the Language Rating itself. Any modified rating less than 1 is treated as a 1.
Players should note that there are no formal troll, dwarf, or ork languages. These characters use the languages of their mothers and fathers, most of whom are human. These groups may often speak a kind of patois, however.
Each language family is listed in bold type, followed by the specific languages. 
Algonkian: Algonkin, Arapaho, Blackfoot, Cheyenne, Cree, Micmac, Mohican, Ojibwa, Shawnee, Wiyot, Yurok Armenian
Athabascan: Apache, Chipewyan, Navaho 
Baltic: Estonian, Latvian (Lettish), Lithuanian 
Basque
Caddoan: Caddo, Pawnee, Wichita 
Celtic: Breton, Irish Gaelic, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh 
Chukchi 
Common Tongues and Hybrids: City Speak (see Special Languages, below), Esperanto, Interlingua 
Dravidian: Gondi, Kannada, Kurukh, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Tulu 
Elvish: See Special Languages, below 
Eskimo
Finnic: Cheremis, Finnish, Karelian, Lapp, Livonian, Mordvin, Veps, Votyak, Zyrian 
Germanic: Afrikaans, Danish, Dutch, English, Flemish, German, Icelandic, Norwegian, Swedish, Yiddish 
Greek
Hamitic: Beja, Berber, Galla, Hausa (Chadic), Somali, Tuareg 
Indic: Assamese, Bengali, Bhili, Gujarati, Hindi, Konkani, Marathi, Oriya, Punjabi, Rajasthani, Sindhi, Sinhalese, Urdu 
Indo-Iranian: Baluchi, Kurdish, Persian (Farsi), Pushtu 
Iroquoian: Cayuga, Cherokee, Erie, Huron, Iroquois, Mohawk, Onandago, Oneida, Seneca, Tuscarora Japanese
Khoisan: Bushman, Hadza, Hottentot, Nama, Sandawe 
Korean
Malayo-Polynesian: Bahasa, Cebuano, Ilocano, Javanese, Kiriwina, Madurese, Malayan, Maori, Melanesian, Micronesian, Misima, Panay-Hilgaynon, Polynesian, Samar-Leyte, Samoan, Sundanese, Tagalog, Taluga 
Mayan: Guatemala, Kekchi, Mam, Quiché-Tzutujil-Cakchique, Yucatan 
Mon-Khmer (Annamite): Cambodian (Khmer), Mon, Vietnamese (Annamese) 
Mongolic: Khalkha (Mongolian) 
Muskhogean: Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, Seminole 
Niger-Kordofanian (Bantu): Anyi, Ashanti, Azande, Bassa, Baule, Bemba, Birom, Bulu, Efik, Ewe, Fang, Fante, Fula, Ganda, Ibo, Igbo, Kikuyu, Kituba, Kongo, Kpele, Kru, Luba, Lunda, Makua, Mande, Mbundu, Mende, More, Mossi, Ngala, Nghaudi, Nyamwezi-Sukuma, Nyanja, Rundi, Rwanda, Shona, Sotho, Sukuma, Swahili, Temne, Tiv, Tswana, Twi, Wolof, Xhosa, Yao, Yoruba, Zande, Zulu 
Nilotic: Bagirmi, Dinka, Fur, Kanembu, Kanuri, Koman, Luo, Maban, Masai, Nuer, Sango, Shilluk, Songhai, Wadai Oto-Manguan: Mixtec, Otomi, Zapotec 
Papuan: Dayak, Negrito, Papu 
Romance: Catalan, French, Galician, Italian, Portuguese, Provençal, Rumanian, Spanish 
Salish: Chehalis, Okanagon, Salish 
Semitic: Amharic, Arabic, Harari, Hebrew, Neo-Aramaic, Tigré, Tigrinya 
Sino-Tibetan: Burmese, Cantonese, Hakka, Kashmiri, Lao, Mandarin, Min, Nepali, Shan, Thai, Tibetan, Wu, Yueh Siouan: Catawba, Crow, Dakota, Hidatsa, Omaha, Osage 
Slavic: Bulgarian, Belorussian, Czech, Georgian, Macedonian, Polish, Russian, Serbo-Croatian, Slovak, Slovene, Ukrainian 
South American Indian: Arowakan, Cariban, Quechua, Tupi-Guarani, many others 
Tlingit
Tsimshian
Tungus
Turkic: Azerbaijani, Chuvash, Kazakh, Kirghiz, Tatar, Turki, Turkish, Uzbek, Yakut ** fused 
Ugric: Magyar (Hungarian), Ostyak, Vogul 
Uto-Aztecan: Aztec, Comanche, Hopi, Paiute, Papago, Pima, Shoshoni, Ute 
Zuni
SPECIAL LANGUAGES
City Speak is one of several languages that are not part of any formal language group. Elvish, known more formally as Sperethiel, has been gaining popularity in recent years. Linguists who have studied the language’s form and content can find no direct connections to existing language groups, though apparent derivations exist in Sperethiel’s structure and style. The language apparently first came into use shortly after the founding of Tir Tairngire. As stated above, orks, trolls, dwarfs, and other groups that commonly live together in certain neighborhoods may frequently develop their own informal patois.
SPECIAL SKILLS 
Special Skills is a catch-all category of skills intended to round out a character as an individual. These include hobbies, interests, artistic endeavors, and other unique skills. Be creative.
SKILL TABLE 
Combat Skills 
Armed Combat 
Clubs (SW) 
Edged Weapons (SW) 
Pole Arms/Staff (SW) 
Whips/Flails (SW) 
Demolitions 
Commercial Explosives 
Plastic Explosives 
Firearms 
Grenade Launchers (SW)
Light Machine Guns (SW)
Pistols (SW)
Rifles (SW)
Submachine Guns (SW)
Tasers (SW)
Gunnery
Assault Cannon (SW)
Machine Guns (SW)
Missile/Rocket Launchers (SW)
Vehicle-Mounted Cannon (SW)
Projectile Weapons Bows (SW)
Crossbows (SW)
Throwing Weapons
Aerodynamic (Shuriken, Airfoil Grenades)
Non-Aerodynamic (Grenades, Knives)
Shafted (SW)
Unarmed Combat
Cyber-Implant Weaponry (SW)
Martial Arts Style (Specific Technique)
Subduing Combat
Physical Skills
Athletics
Climbing
Jumping
Lifting
Running
Swimming
Stealth 
Farmland (by aspect)
Urban (by aspect)
Wilderness (by aspect)
Magical Skills
Conjuring 
Elemental (Type)
Nature Spirit (Type)
Sorcery 
Ritual Sorcery (by Spell Category)
Spellcasting (by Spell Category)
Technical Skills
Biotech 
Extended Care 
First Aid 
Organ Culture (by Organ or Limb)
 Replacement Construction (by Organ or Limb)
Transimplant Surgery (Headware, Bodyware, Organic Replacements)
Computer
Hardware (Mainframes, Micros, Interface Tech, Implant Tech)
Software (Decking, Matrix Programming, Non-Matrix Programming, Interface Programming, Implant Programming)
Electronics 
Control Systems 
Diagnostics 
Electronic Warfare 
Linking between Devices 
Maglocks 
Social Skills
Etiquette 
Corporate 
Matrix 
Media 
Street 
Tribal 
Interrogation 
Machine-Aided (Lie Detectors, Voice-Stress Analysis)
Verbal 
Leadership 
Commercial (Specializations for each concentration include Strategy (general plans), Tactics (topical plans), and Morale)
Military 
Political 
Negotiation 
Bargain 
Bribe 
Fast Talk
Vehicle Skills
Bike 
Racing (SV)
Two-wheeler (SV)
Three-wheeler (SV)
Car 
Passenger Vehicle (SV)
Racing (SV)
Remote Operation (Category)
Truck (SV)
Hovercraft
Passenger Craft (SV)
Racing (SV)
Remote Operation (Category)
Transport Craft (SV)
Motorboat 
Pleasure Craft (SV)
Racing (SV)
Remote Operation (Category)
Transport (SV)
Rotor Craft
Fixed-Rotor (SV)
Remote Operation (Category)
Tilt-Rotor (SV)
Sailboat Pleasure Craft (SV)
Racing (SV)
Transport (SV)
Vectored Thrust LAV Craft (SV)
Remote Operation (Category)
Vertical Take-Off and Landing (SV)
Winged Planes 
Gliders (SV)
Jets (SV)
Propellers (SV)
Racing (SV)
Remote Operation (Category)
Knowledge Skills
Biology 
Botany 
Medicine 
Parabotany 
Parazoology 
Zoology 
Computer Theory 	
Hardware (Mainframes, Micros, Interface Tech, Implant Tech) 
Matrix Theory 
Software (Decking, Matrix Programming, Non-Matrix Programming, Interface Programming, Implant Programming) 
Cybertechnology 
Bodyware (SD)
Headware (SD)
Magical Theory 
Design (Shamanic, Hermetic)
History (by Continent) 
Military Theory 
Military History (by Continent or Period)
Tactics (Air, Land, Sea)
Physical Sciences 
Chemistry 
Engineering 
Geology 
Physics 
Psychology 
Deviant Behavior 
Group Behavior 
Individual Behavior 
Sociology 
Anthropology 
Archaeology 
History

COMBAT
Guns. Guns. Guns. My life would be so dull without them. —Wedge, mercenary
When it’s time to get down to combat between characters, the Shadowrun game proceeds in turns. Each character acts in order, the fastest first, in a set sequence known as the Combat Turn. The Combat Turn attempts to mimic what might occur during real combat, resolving issues such as who acts first, who is faster on the draw, what happens when one character punches another, and so on.
During the Combat Turn, which is roughly three seconds long, each player takes turns describing his character’s action. The Gamemaster’s role is to describe the actions and reactions of the non-player characters as well as the final outcome of all actions.
The Combat Turn is divided into a variable number of Combat Phases. Based on their Initiative, how fast they’re reacting, characters may attempt actions during one or more Combat Phases within a single Combat Turn. An action, as explained in more detail later, is a character’s attempt to do something. Firing a gun, casting a magic spell, and activating a computer program are some typical actions.
These combat rules apply to player characters and non-player characters alike. In those cases where a rule or procedure differs for one or the other, the specific rule will always so indicate.
USING THESE RULES
Players need not attempt to completely understand the Combat Turn procedures on their first read-through of the rules. Sections later in this chapter clarify each step in greater detail. For now, simply read through the overview of the Combat Turn sequence given below. When reading for the first time, players can also ignore the references to other specific rules. These references will become relevant as the players become more familiar with the game and begin to encounter more complex possibilities for action.
The rules relating to magic and decking during the Combat Turn are presented in detail in the chapters covering those subjects.
COMBAT TURN SEQUENCE
The following is a quick summary of the Combat Turn sequence. This Combat Turn sequence is used to resolve all forms of combat, be it hand-to-hand, ranged combat, firearms, magic, vehicle combat, or Matrix combat.
All Dice Pools Refresh (First Combat Turn Only)
If this is the first Combat Turn of a new fight, all Dice Pools of all involved characters refresh, unless this is a Surprise situation (p. 86).
Determine Initiative
Determine Initiative (p. 79) (Reaction plus Initiative dice) for all the characters, critters, spirits, or computer programs involved in the fight. Then determine which character has the highest Initiative total.
Characters Take Actions
Characters involved in the combat now take their actions sequentially, starting with the character with the highest Initiative total. This character is the acting character. If more than one character has the same Initiative total, see Initiative Tie, p. 79.
A. Acting Character’s Dice Pools Refresh
The Dice Pools of the acting character refresh. If he or she has used no dice from the pools, they remain at their current value.
B. Declare Actions
The acting character declares his actions for the Combat Phase. He may make Free, Simple, and Complex Actions, in any order. If multiple characters are acting within one Combat Phase (see Initiative Tie, p. 79), characters declare their actions in reverse order, moving from the one with the lowest Initiative total (or whatever is the determining value) up to the character with the highest Initiative.
C. Resolve Actions
Resolve the actions (see p. 79) of the acting character. Once the actions have been resolved, the character’s Initiative total is reduced by 10. If the resulting Initiative total is higher than 0, the character may take additional actions later in the Combat Turn. See Multiple Actions, p. 79. If it is equal to 0 or less, the character is done for that Combat Turn. If multiple characters are resolving actions during the same phase, resolve those of the character with the highest Initiative total (or whatever is the determining value) first, then the next highest, and so on. (See Initiative Tie, p. 79.)
D. Declare and Resolve Actions of Remaining Characters
Move on to the character with the next highest Initiative total and resolve his actions, starting with step A above. Continue cycling through steps A through D until no character is eligible for actions.
Begin a New Combat Turn
Begin a new Combat Turn, starting again at step 1. Continue cycling through steps 1 through 3 until the combat is resolved. Any unused dice in a character’s Dice Pools carry over to the next Combat Turn and are available for use until the character’s first action of that Turn.
INITIATIVE
Initiative determines the order in which characters take action within a single Combat Turn. Initiative is based on two factors: the character’s total Initiative dice plus his adjusted Reaction Rating. This is called the Initiative total, as explained below.
Each character begins with a base Initiative of one six-sided die (1D6). Various types of cyberware and magic may add more dice. A character’s total Initiative dice is listed in parenthesis following the base number, e.g., 1D6 (2D6). In other words, this character has two Initiative dice (2D6), one up from his base.
All characters have a base Reaction, which is equal to the average of the character’s Intelligence and Quickness Ratings (round down). This number is modified by bonuses for magic or cyberware or by penalties for injuries and the like. A character’s adjusted Reaction is listed in parenthesis following the base number, e.g., 4 (6).
In the Matrix, a decker’s Reaction and Initiative are modified only by the presence of response increase circuitry (see Response Increase, p. 173) in the cyberdeck the character is using. No other forms of Reaction or Initiative modifiers (other than injury modifiers, p. 112) affect the character while in the Matrix.
While rigging, riggers receive only the modifications given them by the vehicle control rig (p. 249) they are using. No other Reaction or Initiative modifiers apply except for injury modifiers.
To get the character’s Initiative total, add his adjusted Reaction to the result of his Initiative roll. The number determines in which Combat Phase the character may first attempt an action.
John Longbone, an ork street samurai, has a listed Reaction of 3 (5) and an Initiative of 1D6 (2D6). (Longbone has reaction-enhancing cyberware that increases his base Reaction by 2, and gives him an additional Initiative die.) Rolling his 2D6 Initiative dice, Longbone gets a 7, to which he adds his adjusted Reaction, 5, for a result of 12. Combat Phase 12 is the first one in which Longbone can act.
The number of Combat Phases in a Combat Turn is equal to the highest Initiative total generated during the Initiative rolls. If, for example, the highest Initiative total was 22, that Combat Turn would have 22 Combat Phases. Events can occur in the first Combat Phase (22) or in any of the following ones, Combat Phases 21–1. No events or actions occur in Combat Phase 0, which signals the end of that Combat Turn.
All events or actions within the Combat Turn must occur during a Combat Phase. The Gamemaster may need to determine, either by decree or randomly, Initiative totals for some events that are beyond character control. Events that occur at the end of a previously designated elapsed time, such as a timed explosive, always occur last in the Combat Turn, after any actions are resolved.
GAMEMASTER NOTE: In any Combat Phase during which decking actions are mixed with astral and/or physical actions, the order for resolving actions is all astral actions first, then all decking actions, then all physical actions.
MULTIPLE ACTIONS
Depending on their Initiative total, characters may have multiple actions. As described above, each character takes his first action in the Combat Phase that corresponds to the number of his Initiative total. Characters become eligible for additional actions every ten Combat Phases thereafter. The four sample characters listed in the first columns below would be eligible for actions in the Combat Phases listed in the third column.
Character
Initiative Total
Combat Phases
A
40
40, 30, 20, and 10
B
27
27, 17, and 7
C
12
12 and 2
D
8
8 only

Our friend Longbone, from the previous example, would have his first action in Combat Phase 12 (his Initiative total) and a second in Combat Phase 2 (12 - 10). His chummer, Shark, a street samurai with much better (and much more expensive) cyberware has a Reaction of 5 (9) and Initiative dice of 1D6 (3D6). If he gets an 18, the maximum result from his Initiative dice roll, he has an Initiative total of 27. Shark therefore can take actions in Combat Phases 27, 17, and 7.
GAMEMASTER NOTE: When running through the Combat Turn sequence, the Gamemaster should ask the players which of their characters has the next highest Initiative total. All should respond. The Gamemaster then compares their responses against the current Initiative totals of any non-player characters involved in the fight. The current Combat Phase then jumps to the number equal to the highest Initiative total. Having the players respond keeps the Initiative totals of their characters in their minds and should help to prevent a player from missing the Combat Phase corresponding to his character’s current Initiative total. If a character misses a Combat Phase, his actions are resolved following the resolution of any character’s actions currently in progress. It is the player’s job to keep track of when his or her character can act. The character can act again in the Combat Phase equal to 10 less than the current Combat Phase.
INITIATIVE TIES
When multiple characters are eligible for actions in the same Combat Turn, the character with the highest Initiative total declares and resolves actions first, followed by the character with the next highest, and so on. If some characters have rolled the same Initiative total, the tie goes to the one with the higher adjusted Reaction. If that does still not break the tie, use the highest natural Reaction. If that is still not good enough, assume that the actions of both characters occur simultaneously.
When multiple characters have actions in the same phase, those actions are declared in reverse order, from the lowest Initiative total (or whatever the deciding value is) to the highest. This way, the faster characters (even slightly so) are still reacting to the actions of the other, slower, characters. When resolving actions, however, work from the higher Initiative totals to the lower; the faster characters first.
Jack Frost and Seventh Son, a street shaman, both have the same Initiative total (15). Seventh Son’s adjusted Reaction is 7, while Jack’s is 12, making Frost faster. Seventh Son declares his actions (because he is the slower), followed by Frost’s declaration of his actions. Because Frost is faster, his actions are resolved first.
DELAYING ACTIONS (OPTIONAL)
When the time for a character’s action comes up in a Combat Phase, the player may declare that he is delaying his character’s actions until a Combat Phase later in the Combat Turn. (The procedure for declaring a Delayed Action is on p. 81.) By delaying, the character chooses to wait until later in the Combat Turn to take his action. While he awaits that moment, the character can do nothing except make Free Actions normally (see p. 81). The benefit of delaying action is that it allows the character to wait and respond to something that may occur later in the turn.
When something finally does occur in a later Combat Phase to which that character wishes to react, the player states that his character is intervening. This must occur during the Declare Actions portion of the Combat Phase, after all other characters acting in that phase have declared actions. If any character’s actions have begun to be resolved, the delaying character can no longer intervene, having waited too long. If multiple characters have delayed actions and now wish to act in the same Combat Phase, use the rules for Initiative Tie, above. In general, declare actions from the lowest Initiative total to the highest for the characters who are acting normally that phase, and then declare the actions of the delaying characters in the same manner. Resolve the actions of the delaying characters first, highest Initiative total to lowest, followed by the actions of the other characters.
Bastion is waiting in ambush (he delayed from Combat Phase 25). Crouched in a covering shadow, he watches an alley for signs of activity. Finally, two men exit a door across the way: they’re the ones Bastion has been waiting for. Now, on Combat Phase 12, Bastion takes his delayed Combat Phase. Bastion’s actions are resolved first in this Combat Phase, followed by the others. All three may act again ten phases later.
Delaying the Action requires a Free Action to initiate, but it costs nothing to finally take the actions. Following the resolution of the delaying character’s actions, subtract 10 from his Initiative total. If the result is greater than 0, the character may act again that Combat Turn. See Multiple Actions, p. 79.
If a character still has a delayed action at the end of a Combat Turn, the Delayed Action carries over into the next Combat Turn. The character’s Initiative total is determined using the normal procedure. He may take the Delayed Action at any time during that Combat Turn, even if the Combat Phase in which it occurs is at a higher Initiative total than the delaying character’s own.
Bastion, waiting in ambush elsewhere (he’s that kind of guy), has carried over his Delayed Actions from the previous Combat Turn. His Initiative total for the new Combat Turn is 17, but his target appears in his sniper rifle’s sights on Combat Phase 29. Because of the Delayed Action, he may act now even though the Combat Phase occurs before he would normally be allowed to do so.
The delayed action is resolved normally. The delaying character may act again ten Combat Phases later or in the phase corresponding to his new Initiative total for that Combat Turn, whichever is less.
Dice Pools refresh in the Combat Phase during which the delay is initiated. They do not refresh again when the character takes his Delayed Action. If the character uses dice from any Dice Pool for any reason while his Action is delayed, the delay is broken and the Action does not occur. See Dice Pools, p. 84.
A character can have only one Delayed Action at any one time.
Following the resolution of his Delayed Action, Bastion is not eligible for additional actions until the Combat Phase corresponding to his Initiative total of 17, because it is less than 19 (triggering Combat Phase 29 minus 10). Had the trigger event occurred in Combat Phase 18 instead, Bastion could not act again until Combat Phase 8 (triggering Combat Phase 18 minus 10, which is less than his own Initiative total of 17).
ACTIONS
Characters can carry out three different action types within a Combat Phase: Free, Simple, and Complex. A character can take one Free Action, and either two Simple Actions or one Complex Action as his or her action.
FREE ACTIONS
Free Actions are relatively simple, nearly automatic actions that require little or no effort to accomplish. Examples are saying a word, dropping an object, dropping prone, or casually looking at something.
A character may take a Free Action during any Combat Phase of the Combat Turn even if it is not a phase in which he is eligible for action. Only one Free Action is possible during any given Combat Phase. A character may NOT take a Free Action PRIOR to his first action unless that character has delayed an action from a previous Combat Turn, as described above.
Free Actions generally require no Success Test, though special circumstances may warrant one. Following are descriptions of many possible Free Actions involved in combat in Shadowrun.
Activate Cyberware
A character may use a Free Action to activate a piece of cyberware that is not continually turned on. This equipment includes headware radio/telephone, thermographic vision, and so on. See Cyberware, p. 246.
Call a Shot
A character may “call a shot” (aim for a vulnerable portion of a target) with this Free Action. See Called Shots, p. 92. This action must be immediately followed by a Take Aim, Fire Weapon, Throw Weapon, or Melee Unarmed Attack.
Change Smartgun Fire Mode
Characters holding a ready smartgun (with smartlink headware) may change their weapon’s fire mode as a Free Action. See Fire Mode, p. 92, and Smartlink, p. 90.
Delay Action
A character may delay an eligible action by expending a Free Action. See Delaying Actions, p. 80. This Free Action is only possible during a Combat Phase in which a character is eligible for action. See Multiple Actions, p. 79.
Drop Prone
A character may drop prone at any time, as long as he is not surprised (see p. 86). A character who is surprised may not drop prone. A magician sustaining a spell must make a Willpower (2) Test to avoid losing concentration on the spell when dropping prone.
Drop Object
A character may drop a held object as a Free Action. If he is holding objects in both hands, he may drop both objects as a single Free Action.
Drop Sustained Spell
A magician may drop a sustained spell as a Free Action.
Eject Smartgun Clip
A character holding a ready smartgun (with smartlink headware) may use a simple cybernetic command to eject the weapon’s clip. It still takes a Simple Action to insert a new, fresh clip. See Smartlink, p. 90.
Gesture
A character may execute one gesture as a Free Action. (However ludicrous this may sound, it pertains primarily to the use of gestures as silent communication in combat situations.)
Observe
A character may observe as a Free Action. See Perception, p. 185. A character who is observing can see only what is immediately obvious, though active vision enhancements (low-light, thermographic) apply. No actual Perception Test is possible when observing as a Free Action. (See also Observe In Detail under Simple Actions.)
Speak a Word
Each word spoken is a Free Action, but, for all practical purposes, characters can speak in a coherent phrase or two when necessary. The Gamemaster may wish to enforce the single action-single word rule in order to control excessive, unrealistic conversations within the span of a Combat Turn (about three seconds). Some Gamemasters and players may, however, prefer elaborate communication.
SIMPLE ACTIONS
A Simple Action is one step more complicated than a Free Action, and requires a bit more concentration to attempt. Only a few require a Success Test to accomplish, however.
A Free Action may be taken in place of a Simple Action.
During any Combat Phase, the character may take up to two Simple Actions or one Complex Action.
The following are typical Simple Actions occurring in combat in the Shadowrun game.
Change Gun Mode
A character holding a ready firearm can change its fire mode via a Simple Action. If the weapon is a properly linked smartgun, it takes only a Free Action to change the mode. See Fire Mode, p. 92, and Smartlink, p. 90.
Change Position
Using a Simple Action, a character may either stand up or lie down (becoming prone). If the character is wounded and attempting to stand up, he needs a Willpower (2) Test to stand up. Remember to include any injury modifiers to the target number. Characters can always fall down without making a test (or by using the Free Action of Drop Prone).
Command a Spirit
Using a Simple Action, a magician character may issue a command to a nature or elemental spirit under his control. See also Elemental Services and Nature Spirit Services, p. 140.
Fire Weapon
A character may fire a ready firearm in single-shot, semi-automatic, or burst-fire mode via a Simple Action. See Firearms, p. 92, for more information. If a character has one weapon in each hand, he may fire once with each weapon by expending one Simple Action. See Using a Second Firearm, p. 90.
Single-shot weapons may be fired only once per Combat Phase.
Using Fire Weapon, a character may fire a bow-weapon (regular bow or crossbow) that has been previously made ready using the Simple Action of Ready Weapon. See Projectile Weapons, p. 96.
Insert Clip
A character may insert a fresh clip into a ready firearm by taking a Simple Action, but only if he has first removed the previous clip. See the Simple Action of Remove Clip, below, and also Reloading Firearms, p. 95.
Observe in Detail
A character may make a detailed observation by taking a Simple Action. See Perception, p. 185.
Pick Up/Put Down Object
A character may pick up an object within reach or put down one that he was holding by expending a Simple Action.
Quick Draw
A character may attempt to quick-draw a pistol or pistol-sized weapon (Concealability 4 or greater, see p. 94) and immediately fire it by expending a Quick Draw action. For the character to successfully draw the weapon, the player must make a Reaction (4) Test. Only 1 success is necessary to clear the weapon. If the pistol is not held in a proper holster, add a +2 target modifier. If the test is successful, the character may draw the pistol and fire normally. If the test fails, he cannot fire the gun this Combat Phase.
Only weapons that can be fired with a Simple Action can be quick-drawn. Two weapons may be quick-drawn and fired, but this adds an additional +2 target modifier to each Reaction Test. See Using a Second Firearm, p. 90.
Ready Weapon
A character may ready a weapon by spending a Simple Action. The weapon may be a firearm, melee weapon, throwing weapon, ranged weapon, or mounted or vehicular weapon. Readying entails drawing a firearm from a holster, drawing a throwing or melee weapon from a sheath, picking up any kind of weapon, nocking an arrow in a bow or crossbow, or generally preparing any kind of weapon for use. A weapon must be ready before it can be used.
A character can ready a number of small throwing weapons, such as throwing knives or shuriken, equal to one-half his Quickness (round down) per Ready Weapon action.
Remove Clip
A character may remove a clip from a ready firearm by taking a Simple Action. See Insert Clip, above, and also Reloading Firearms, p. 95. It takes another Simple Action to grab a fresh clip and slam it into the weapon.
The wielder of a smartgun with properly linked headware may eject the gun’s clip by spending a Free Action to make a simple cybernetic command. See Smartlink, p. 90.
Shift Perception
A Simple Action allows a magician to shift perception to or from astral space. Actual astral projection requires a Complex Action. See Astral Perception, p. 145.
Take Aim
A character may take aim with a ready ranged weapon (firearm, bow, or throwing weapon) as a Simple Action. Take Aim actions are cumulative, but the benefits are lost if the character takes any other kind of action, including a Free Action. Take Aim actions may be extended over multiple Combat Phases and Combat Turns. The maximum number of sequential Take Aim actions a character may take is equal to one-half the character’s skill with that weapon, rounded down.
Characters who are aiming over multiple Combat Phases may not use Dice Pool dice for any reason without losing the benefits of the Take Aim actions.
Each Take Aim action reduces the base target number by 1. See Resolving Ranged Combat, p. 87.
Throw Weapon
A character may throw a ready throwing weapon (see Ready Weapon, above) by taking a Simple Action.
Use Simple Object
A character may use a simple object by taking a Simple Action. In this case, simple is defined as being able to operate the device or mechanism via a simple activity such as pushing a button, turning a knob (doors must be unlocked to be opened with a Simple Action), pulling a lever, and so on. The Gamemaster may have to decide on a case-by-case basis if a device or mechanism is simple or complex. A character can also use objects such as potions, pills, skillsofts, or patches by taking a Simple Action.
COMPLEX ACTIONS
A Complex Action requires the most intense concentration of all the possible action types. Only one Complex Action is possible per Combat Phase. A character who wishes to take a Complex Action may also take a Free Action that Combat Phase, but no Simple Actions are possible.
Astral Projection
A magician may accomplish astral projection by taking a Complex Action. See Astral Projection, p. 146.
Cast Spell
A magician may cast a spell by taking a Complex Action. See Casting Spells, p. 129.
Melee/Unarmed Attack
A character may attack with a melee weapon, or unarmed, by taking a Complex Action. See Melee Combat, p. 100. A character may attack multiple targets within melee range with a single Complex Action. See Multiple Targets, p. 102.
Fire Automatic Weapon
A character may fire a ready firearm in full autofire mode by taking a Complex Action. See Firearms, p. 92.
Fire Mounted or Vehicle Weapon
A character may fire a ready mounted or vehicle weapon by taking a Complex Action. See Vehicle Combat, p. 105.
Reload Firearm
Weapons that do not use clips must be reloaded using a Complex Action. See Reloading Firearms, p. 95.
Summon Nature Spirit
A shaman may summon a nature spirit by taking a Complex Action. See Summoning Nature Spirits, p. 140.
Use Complex Object
A character may operate a complex object, such as a computer, cyberdeck, vehicle, and so on, by taking a Complex Action. “Use” entails activating a program, issuing detailed instructions, conducting an internal operation (such as copying files), driving the vehicle, and the like. This cannot be done while running.
Use Skill
A character may use an appropriate skill by taking a Complex Action. See Skills, p. 66.
MOVEMENT
In addition to the choices of Free, Simple, and Complex Actions, characters may also choose to move during a Combat Phase. Movement in no way changes the availability of Free, Simple, or Complex Actions.
There are two types of movement: walking and running. Characters may move at one of the two rates during a Combat Phase. They may also choose to remain stationary if they wish. Characters who have multiple Actions may run only in one of those Combat Phases, but it does not matter which.
WALKING
When walking, characters may move at a pace equal to their Quickness Rating in meters during that Combat Phase. If they are combining the movement with an action that requires some form of Success Test, the character takes a +1 target modifier. If the movement is over rough terrain or through obstacles, the character takes a +2 target modifier.
RUNNING
Characters who are running may move a number of meters equal to their Quickness Rating multiplied by the appropriate running modifier from the table below. The result is in meters per Combat Phase.
Characters who are running take a +4 target modifier to any tests attempted while running.
Characters with Running Skill may attempt to increase their running distance by spending a Complex Action (Use Skill). Each success against a Target Number 4 increases the character’s effective Quickness by 1 point for that Combat Phase.
RUNNING TABLE


Race
Running Modifier
Human
×3
Dwarf
×2
Elf
×3
Ork
×3
Troll
×2

INTERCEPTION
If movement takes a character within one meter of an opponent, and the character attempts to pass by without attacking the opponent, that opponent can take a free melee attack. If the opponent has a weapon ready, he uses his normal Armed Combat Skill Rating; otherwise, he uses Unarmed Combat Skill. The attacker’s target number is 4. The only modifiers are those applied for reach, movement, or the attacker’s condition. The character can choose to Subdue (p. 103) if he chooses. The defending character is assumed to be in full Defense (p. 103).

If the character attempting to pass takes damage (see Melee Combat, p. 100), he is considered to be intercepted and he cannot continue his movement.
The Combat Pool may be used to augment these rolls.
DICE POOLS
Dice Pools initially become available for use at full value as the first step of the first Combat Turn of any encounter. Characters can then draw from them, as appropriate for the type of pool, during the Combat Turn. Once dice are drawn from the pool, those dice are no longer available for use until the pool refreshes at the beginning of the character’s next action. More than one die can be used to augment a test, subject to the limitations of the Dice Pool.
When using dice from a Dice Pool to augment a test, the player adds the Dice Pool dice directly to those normally used for the test. That is, if a character would normally roll 4 dice for a test, but takes 3 more dice from the appropriate pool to augment the test, he now rolls a total of 7 dice.
Some pools have limitations on how many dice can be added to a single test. See the descriptions for the respective Dice Pools for more information.
Dice from a Dice Pool should be a different color than the other dice used in the test.
Ellen Whitelace, heavy pistol held out before her in a combat grip, is fresh out of options: if she doesn’t take down the charging troll right fraggin’ now, she’ll never have to worry about options again. Her player can choose to use none, some, or all of the dice in Whitelace’s Combat Pool to augment her Firearms Test. Whatever dice she uses to augment the test will be unavailable again until the beginning of Whitelace’s NEXT action. In this case, Whitelace has a Combat Pool of 6 dice. Her player, knowing that the troll has to be stopped, decides to use all 6 dice. That leaves no dice in the character’s Combat Pool until her next action. If the Whitelace player had decided to use, say, only 4 dice, 2 dice would still have remained for use. Whitelace’s player has decided to risk it all in taking down the troll. If Whitelace does not stop the troll now, he could well come after her again at a time when she has no Combat Pool dice to use defensively.
At the start of each character’s action, all his or her Dice Pools refresh to their original, full value. Thus, if a character has a Magic Pool with 8 dice, the pool always returns to 8 dice at the start of that character’s action. Unused pool dice do not carry over from one action to the next. Pool dice not used by the end of a Combat Turn are available for use early in the next Combat Turn, but are lost on the character’s first action of that Turn.
Whitelace geeks the troll, barely, but now has a trio of ninja wannabees looking to slice and dice her. When the Combat Turn ends, she still has 3 dice in her Combat Pool. Rolling for Initiative, her player makes an Initiative total of 18. Those remaining 3 dice can be used anytime, subject to the rules of the Combat Pool, prior to her action 18. She’ll need them: two of the ninja wannabees have actions before her.
The Dice Pools of characters who delay actions refresh in the Combat Phase during which they delayed. The pools do not, however, refresh when the action actually comes up. The characters must wait until their next eligible action after the triggered action. If dice are drawn from any Pool, for any reason, at any time during the delay period (before the triggering event occurs), the delay is lost. See Delaying Actions, p. 80.
COMBAT POOL
The Combat Pool represents the attention the character is giving to his or her offensive and defensive posture. Dice from the Combat Pool may be allocated to any offensive or defensive combat-related tests, such as Firearm, Projectile Weapon, Throwing Weapon, Gunnery, Melee Combat, or similar offensive Combat Skill Tests (see Success Tests, p. 66). It is also possible to use dice from the Combat Pool to augment Damage Resistance Tests (see p. 102) against normal attacks.

Jonah Hammer, a mercenary with far too much attitude, has a Combat Pool of 7 dice. He has Firearms, Projectile Weapons, Throwing Weapons, and Gunnery Skills, and can use dice from the Combat Pool to augment tests for those skills. If attacked, he can also use dice from his Combat Pool for the Damage Resistance Test.
A character’s Combat Pool is equal to his Quickness, Intelligence, and Willpower Ratings, divided by 2, rounding down. Note that the personal combat sense spell (p. 153) does affect the Combat Pool, as do other spells that affect Quickness, Intelligence, or Willpower.
The Combat Pool refreshes according to the standard Dice Pool rules.
The maximum number of Combat Pool dice that a character can add to any offensive Success Test is equal to his rating in the skill for which he is making the test. For example, a character with a Combat Skill of 5 can add only 5 more dice from his Combat Pool when making a Combat Success Test.
There is no limit on the number of dice that a character may draw from the Combat Pool for a defensive Damage Resistance Test.
The only time the Combat Pool can be used to augment or resist magic-related Success Tests is in the case of damaging manipulation spells. A character can use dice from the Combat Pool to augment the Damage Resistance Test against these spells. See Manipulation Spells, p. 127.
An attack is considered to be a complete miss if the successes earned purely from the Combat Pool dice exceed the successes earned by the attacker. See Resolving Ranged Combat, p. 87, and Resolving Melee Combat, p. 100.
Characters wearing partial or full heavy armor take reductions to their Combat Pools. Those types of armor reduce the Combat Pool by 1 die for every point of Ballistic Armor Rating the armor has over the wearing character’s Quickness Rating. See Armor, p. 242.
CONTROL POOL
The Control Pool is used by riggers to augment tests relating to vehicle control, such as Driving or Piloting (p. 183) and Position Tests (p. 105).

A rigger’s Control Pool is equal to the character’s Reaction, modified only by a vehicle control rig. Reaction bonuses from other sources are of no help.
The Control Pool refreshes in accordance with the standard Dice Pool rules. See Vehicle Combat, p. 105, for special rules related to the Control Pool and Position Tests.
The maximum number of Control Pool dice that a character can add to any control-related test is equal to the base number of dice involved in the test. That is, the maximum number of Control Dice that a character can add to a control-related test is equal to his rating for the skill he is attempting to use.
Only characters with a Vehicle Control Rig (see p. 104) can use a Control Pool.
HACKING POOL
Deckers use dice from the Hacking Pool to augment decking-related tests such as Utility Tests (p. 174) and the MPCP Resistance Test in Matrix combat (p. 179). Hacking Pool dice cannot be used to augment defensive utility programs.
A character’s Hacking Pool is equal to his or her Computer Skill (or Software Concentration or Decking Specialization) plus the character’s Reaction. The only bonuses that can help the Hacking Pool are those received from cyberdeck response increase circuitry (p. 173). Bonuses received from other sources do not help.
The Hacking Pool refreshes in accordance with the standard Dice Pool rules.
The maximum number of Hacking Pool dice that can be added to any test is equal to the base number of dice in use. That is, the maximum number of Hacking Pool dice that can be added to a program-related test is equal to the rating of the program. Similarly, the maximum number of dice that can be added to the MPCP Resistance Test is equal to the rating of the MPCP.
Only characters with a cyberdeck (see p. 172) can use a Hacking Pool.
MAGIC POOL
A magician uses dice from the Magic Pool to augment certain magic-related Tests. Dice from the Magic Pool can be used to augment Spell Success Tests and Drain Resistance Tests in spellcasting (p. 129), in a special manner for ritual sorcery (p. 133), and for specific or area-effect Spell Defense (p. 132). Dice from the Magic Pool cannot be used to augment Conjuring-related Tests.
A character’s Magic Pool is equal to his or her Sorcery Skill Rating (or any Concentration or Specialization of that skill, per those rules on p. 70), plus the rating of any applicable power foci the character may have (see foci, p. 137). Shamans also receive conditional bonuses to their Magic Pool based on the totem they follow. See Totem Modifiers, p. 119.
The Magic Pool refreshes in accordance with the standard Dice Pool rules.
The maximum number of Magic Pool dice that a character can add to a Magic Success Test is equal to his Magic Attribute. For example, a character with a Magic Attribute of 6 could add a maximum of 6 dice to a Success Test for a Force Rating 4 spell; that is, he would make the test with a total of 10 dice.
There is no limit to the number of dice a character may draw from the Magic Pool for the Drain Resistance Test. See the special rules associated with Ritual Magic (p. 133) and Spell Defense (p. 132) for more on the Magic Pool in those situations. Magic Pool dice cannot be used to augment Conjuring-related Tests.
Dice from the Magic Pool are allocated immediately following the Declare Actions step of the Combat Turn.
CRITTER COMBAT
In Shadowrun, the term critter covers a wide variety of creatures and beings. The group includes regular animals, paranormal animals, spirits, and individuals who have been affected by magical viruses, like vampires and ghouls.
INITIATIVE
Initiative for critters is determined in exactly the same way as normal character Initiative. All animals have a base Reaction Rating and a number of Initiative dice based on their reflexes (usually 1, 2, and yes, even 3D6). See the Critter Statistics Table, p. 233, for those statistics. The Initiative dice are rolled and added to the animal’s Reaction Rating to determine its Initiative total.
ACTIONS
Sentient creatures may perform the same actions as normal characters, assuming they have the physical or paranormal means to do so. This may require some judgment on the part of the Gamemaster, based on the information presented in the Critters chapter, p. 214. The only Free Actions available to non-sentient creatures are Cease Using Power (similar to Drop Sustained Spell), Delay Action, Drop Prone, Drop Object (as appropriate), or Observe. They can use the Simple Actions of Change Position, Observe In Detail, or Pick Up/Put Down Object (as appropriate), and Complex Actions like Attack (like Melee/Unarmed Attack) or Use Power (similar to Cast Spell).
DICE POOLS
Critters do not have Dice Pools. They do have Threat Ratings, however. See below and also Behind the Scenes, p. 187.
CRITTER THREAT RATINGS
Critters, like non-player characters, have Threat Ratings to reflect increased hazard or ability. The Threat Rating is a permanent addition of dice to augment any applicable tests the critter makes, whether offensive (especially attack-related) or defensive.
The Threat Rating is not added to Initiative dice for the purpose of determining the creature’s Initiative, however. Use the standard formula of adding together the Reaction Rating and the Initiative dice.
Threat Rating dice should be treated as Combat Pool dice for the purposes of determining a clean miss. See Combat Pool, p. 84.
It is ultimately the Gamemaster’s option as to when to apply a critter’s Threat Rating dice, based on that critter’s abilities and general strengths.
COMBAT SKILLS
Sentient creatures may have skills, but if they do not, they usually follow the same rules as non-sentient creatures. See the Critters chapter, starting on p. 214, for more information. Non-sentient creatures use their Reaction Rating as their base dice for physical attacks. Creatures with paranormal abilities use either Quickness, Intelligence, Willpower, or Reaction, as appropriate for the ability or power.
Critters make Damage Resistance Tests normally, but add their Threat Rating to the test dice.
SURPRISE
Characters sometimes appear where and when they are not expected. This may be deliberate, as in the case of a planned ambush. Or it may be accidental, as in the case of two unlucky security guards who stumble over a group of shadowrunners committing some nefarious deed. In these and other similar instances, a surprise situation can occur.
When surprised, a character can do little except watch events unfold. Surprise, as a game concept, occurs individually on a character-by-character basis. Thus, a player character walking into an ambush set by two non-player characters may find himself surprised by Ambusher A, but not by Ambusher B. In this case, the player character can take actions against Ambusher B, but not against Ambusher A, because it was Ambusher A that surprised him.
To resolve surprise and ambush situations, all participants must make Reaction Tests. Each character rolls his Reaction dice against a Target Number 4. The ambusher-characters, if they have delayed actions as they lie in wait for the arrival or appearance of their targets, receive a -2 to their target numbers. Gamemasters may also wish to apply additional target number modifiers for terrain, proper (or improper) camouflage, and other extenuating circumstances.
Each character’s successes are then compared individually against the successes generated by the opposing characters. One of the following two results may occur against each of the opposing characters:
If a character has not generated more successes than a particular opposing character, he cannot take any actions that directly affect, impede, or counteract that character.
If the character has generated more successes than a particular opponent, the first character can take actions against the second.
Tess, Virgil, and Winger are waiting in ambush for three Mitsuhama security goons. The goons arrive, and our heroes spring their ambush. Tess has a Reaction of 6, Virgil an 8, and Winger a 9. The three goons all have Reaction 4. All characters make Reaction Tests. Rolling against Target Numbers of 2 (4, minus 2 for being ambushers), Tess gets 3 successes, Virgil 4, and Winger 5. Goon A gets a 4, Goon B gets 2, and Goon C gets none. Comparing successes, we find that Tess (3 successes) can act fully against Goon B (2 successes) and Goon C (0 successes), but can do nothing against Goon A (4 successes). Virgil can take actions against Goons B and C, but not A because Virgil and Goon A have the same number of successes. With 5 successes, Winger can act against everybody.
The goons are in deep trouble. Goon A can only take actions against Tess (4 successes versus 3), and that’s it. Neither Goon B nor Goon C can take actions against any of the shadowrunners. Goon B simply did not generate enough successes, and Goon C, with no successes, is caught with his mouth hanging open or admiring a particularly attractive crack in the sidewalk.
All losses of actions, or limitations on actions, pertain to the character’s current action (if he is acting) or the next action, if it is not his or her action. Surprise should be resolved before any actions in a Combat Phase.
Gamemasters will no doubt have to make numerous judgment calls in combat situations. The main idea in a surprise situation is that characters who do not generate more successes than a particular opponent in the Reaction Test cannot act against or react directly to that character. They are surprised by that character. The character can carry out other actions of a more general nature that are not directed at the opposing character, such as dropping prone or readying a weapon (but not firing it).
Characters who are unable to generate more successes than any members of the opposition suffer doubly. If anyone in the opposition generated more successes than the first character, the latter is considered to be completely surprised and is unable to take any actions of any kind, including Free Actions. The character may act again normally after ten Combat Phases.
Critters and animals all obey the same rules for surprise, as do spirits. Magical spells, programs, and IC are never surprised. Sorry.
RANGED COMBAT
There are two kinds of combat in Shadowrun: ranged combat involving weapons, and melee, or hand-to-hand combat. All ranged combat, whether it involves firearms, projectile weapons, or thrown weapons, is resolved in the same manner. Ranged magic combat is explained in the Magic section, starting on p. 116.
RESOLVING RANGED COMBAT
Use the procedure outlined below for resolving ranged combat. Each step is explained further in the following sections.
Determine Range
Count the number of meters to the target and compare the weapon type against the appropriate range column on the Weapon Range Table (p. 88) to find the base target number.
Apply Situational Target Modifiers
Consult the Ranged Combat Modifiers Table (p. 89) and apply the appropriate situation modifiers.
Attacker’s Success Test
Make the attacker’s Success Test using the appropriate Combat Skill, modified by dice from the character’s Combat Pool. Count the successes. See p. 90, below.
Resolve Target’s Damage Resistance Test
Make the target’s Damage Resistance Test using Body dice and Combat Pool dice against a target number equal to the Power Rating of the weapon used, minus the target’s Armor Rating. Count the successes.
Determine the Result
Compare the successes. Depending on the outcome, the Damage Level may be staged up or down, or the attack may miss entirely. Apply any damage to the target’s Condition Monitor.
Apply Damage
The weapon’s damage is staged accordingly and applied against the target, if necessary. See p.91, below.  
BASE TARGET NUMBER
To determine a weapon’s base target number, check the distance to the target in meters and then consult the Weapon Range Table below. Shots against targets at short range have a base target number of 4. Shots against targets at medium range are against a 5, long range against a 6, and extreme range against a 9.
The base target number appears at the top of the appropriate range column. All distances are in meters. Weapons marked with asterisks at short range have minimum range requirements. For impact projectiles, the notes “to STR × 10” and the like mean that the bow’s Strength Minimum is used to determine the distance. That is, a bow being wielded by a character with a Strength Rating 5 has a 0- to 5-meter short range, 6- to 50-meter medium range, a 51- to 150-meter long range, and a 151- to 300-meter extreme range. See Strength Minimum Rating, p. 96.
Minimum Ranges
Weapons marked with an asterisk cannot be fired at targets closer than the minimum value given under Short Range. See Grenade Launcher Minimum Range, p. 97, and Missile Launchers, p. 99.
Image Modification Systems
These systems shorten a weapon’s range category by a number of levels equal to the device’s rating. A Rating 2 targeting scope firing at long range would, for example, shift range two places to the left on the Weapon Range Table. Long range would change to short range, and the base target number (normally 6 for an attack at long range) would drop to Target Number 4 for short range. Short range is the minimum, so the same device used for an attack at medium range could not reduce the range category to less than the minimum for short range.
SITUATIONAL TARGET MODIFIERS
Things are not always as easy as they seem. Weapon accessories, intervening terrain, atmospheric conditions, and the movement of the attacker and the target can change the base target number. As with tests for skills or attributes, the character’s physical condition also affects the target number.
Target numbers modified to less than 2 are assumed to be 2. A target number can never be less than 2.
The various ranged combat modifiers are given on the following table. Each condition is described individually following this table.
To determine the final, adjusted target number, total all the applicable modifiers and apply that number to the base target number found earlier. The result is the adjusted target number. The adjusted target number can never be less than 2.
RANGED COMBAT MODIFIERS TABLE


Situation
Modifier
Recoil, Semi-automatic
+1 for second shot that Combat Phase
Recoil, Burst-fire
+3 per burst that Combat Phase
Recoil, Full-auto
+1 per round fired that Combat Phase
Recoil, Heavy weapon
2× uncompensated recoil
Blind Fire
+8
Partial Cover
+4
Visibility Impaired
See Visibility Table
Multiple Targets
+2 per additional target that Combat Phase
Target Running
+2
Target Stationary
-1
Attacker in Melee Combat
+2 per opponent
Attacker Running
+4
Attacker Running (difficult ground)
+6
Attacker Walking
+1
Attacker Walking (difficult ground)
+2
Attacker Wounded
See Injury Modifier, p. 112
Smartlink (with smartgun)
-2
Smart Goggles (with smartgun)
-1
Laser Sight
-1
Using a Second Firearm
+2
Aimed Shot
-1 per Simple Action
Image Magnification
Special
Recoil Compensation
Reduces recoil modifier
Gyro Stabilization
Reduces recoil or movement modifier

Recoil
Weapons that fire more than one round in an action are subject to an escalating recoil modifier as the rounds leave the weapon. Semi-automatic weapons that fire a second shot receive a +1 modifier for the second shot only. Burst-fire receives a +3 recoil modifier for each burst fired that Combat Phase. Thus, a character who fires the maximum of two bursts in an action receives a +3 modifier for the first burst and an additional +3 modifier (total of +6) for the second burst. Full-auto fire weapons take a cumulative +1 modifier for each round fired that Combat Phase. That is, a character choosing to fire a seven-round full-auto burst receives a +7 modifier. If that same character chooses instead to fire two five-round full-auto bursts, he would have a +5 modifier (four previous rounds) for the first burst and a +10 modifier (nine previous rounds) for the second burst.
The only way to counter a recoil modifier is with recoil compensation or gyro stabilization (p. 240).
Double the uncompensated recoil modifiers for heavy weapons (specifically, medium and heavy machine guns and shotguns). If a medium machine gun is firing 10 rounds, and has 6 points of recoil compensation, its final recoil modifier would be +6 (9 - 6 = 3, 3 doubled is 6).
Blind Fire
Attacks against targets that cannot be seen take a +8 modifier. This modifier normally applies only to attacks through opaque barriers or for indirect fire by grenade or missile launchers against targets that cannot be seen. Attacks against normally visible targets that are now invisible also suffer this modifier.
Partial Cover
Attacks against targets obscured by intervening terrain such as brush, foliage, obstacles (crates, windows, doorways, curtains, and the like) receive a +4 modifier. Obscurity due to environmental conditions like smoke or darkness uses modifiers given on the Visibility Table, below.
Visibility Impaired
Environmental conditions such as darkness or smoke occasionally affect combat conditions. How much depends on the type of vision the attacker is using. Consult the Visibility Table for the modifiers.
If the table listing is split by a slash, the first modifier is for cybernetic or electronic vision and the second for natural, metahuman vision. If no slash appears, the modifier applies equally to all vision types.
Full Darkness usually occurs only indoors or underground, and indicates a complete absence of light. Minimal Light indicates the presence of a small amount of light (small flashlight, match, leaking light, moonlight, and so on). Partial Light is the most common, being the lighting condition of city streets at night, partially lit stairways and hallways, and so on. Glare occurs when the attacker is looking directly into a bright light, be it the sun or an artificial light source such as a search or spotlight. Mist is very light rain or blowing snow. Light Smoke/Fog/Rain is the presence of thin smoke (perhaps from a fire), a light inland fog, or light rain. Heavy Smoke/Fog/Rain is the heavy version of the previous. Thermal Smoke is special smoke designed to block thermographic vision. Thermal smoke affects thermographic vision the way normal smoke affects normal vision.
VISIBILITY TABLE






Condition
Type of Vision






Normal
Low-Light
Thermographic
Full Darkness
+8
+8/+8
+4/+2
Minimal Light
+5
+4/+2
+4/+2
Partial Light
+2
+1/0
+2/+1
Glare
+2
+2/0
0
Mist
+4
+4/+2
0
Light Smoke/Fog/Rain
+4
+4/+2
0
Heavy Smoke/Fog/Rain
+6
+6/+4
+1/0
Thermal Smoke
As smoke
As smoke
As normal

Multiple Targets
If a character is attacking multiple targets within a single Combat Phase, he takes a +2 modifier per additional target. That is, if a character were firing on full-auto fire and engaging three targets (three-round, four-round, and three-round bursts), he would suffer a +2 modifier for the second target and a +4 modifier for the third target.
Target Running
If the target is running at the time of the attack or during his previous action, the attack suffers a +2 modifier.
Target Stationary
Attacks against an unmoving, stationary target reduce the target number by 1.
Attacker in Melee Combat
If the attacker is attempting to conduct a ranged attack while engaged in melee combat with an opponent, or if he is aware of another character attempting to block the attempt within two meters of him, the attack takes a +2 modifier per opponent present.
Attacker Running
If the attacker is running at the time of the attack, the attack takes a +4 modifier. If the attacker is running over difficult, hazardous, or broken ground, the modifier is +6. Movement modifiers can be counteracted by gyro-stabilization systems, described below. See also p. 83, Movement.
Attacker Walking
Modifiers are +1 for normal walking and +2 for walking over difficult, hazardous, or broken ground. See also p. 83, Movement.
Attacker Wounded
The attacker has taken damage. See Injury Modifier, p. 112.
Smartlink
Characters with smartlink headware and a properly equipped smartweapon (see p. 241) receive a -2 target modifier.
Smart Goggles
Characters wearing smart goggles and using a properly equipped smartweapon (see p. 241) receive a -1 modifier.
Laser Sight
Attacks using weapons equipped with a laser sight receive a -1 modifier. Laser sights are only effective out to 50 meters and are counteracted by the presence of mist, light or heavy smoke, fog, or rain.
Using a Second Firearm
Characters can use two pistol or SMG class weapons, one in each hand. Doing so, however, imposes a +2 target modifier to each weapon, and negates any target number reductions due to smartlinks, smart goggles, or laser sights. Additionally, any uncompensated recoil modifiers received by one weapon also apply to the other weapon.
Aimed Shot
Characters that aim receive a -1 modifier per Simple Action spent aiming. See Take Aim, p. 82, for more information.
Image Magnification
This equipment reduces the range and associated base target number. See Imaging Scopes, p. 240.
Recoil Compensation
Recoil compensation systems counteract the effects of recoil on a weapon. The recoil modifier is reduced at a rate of -1 per point of recoil compensation the system provides. See Firearm Accessories, p. 240, for the exact degrees of recoil compensation. Recoil compensation is cumulative, and only counteracts recoil modifiers, not non-recoil situational modifiers.
Gyro-Stabilization
Gyro-stabilization provides portable, stabilized firing platforms that counter the effects of recoil and movement-based modifiers (such as for running or walking). The total recoil and movement modifiers are reduced by -1 for every point of gyro-stabilization the system provides. See Firearm Accessories, p. 240, for the exact degrees of gyro-stabilization available. Gyro-stabilization counteracts only recoil and movement modifiers and does not counter any non-recoil or movement situational modifiers. Gyro-stabilization is cumulative with recoil compensation.
Attacker Success Test
To determine the outcome of the attack, the player makes a Success Test using a number of dice equal to his character’s appropriate Ranged Combat Skill, plus additional dice from the character’s Combat Pool. Compare each individual die rolled against the modified target number using the Rule of One and the Rule of Six (p. 32). Each die that equals or exceeds the target number is counted as a success. If there are no successes, the attack has missed.
Keep track of this number. Write it down.
Liam has Firearms Skill 6 and is using 4 dice from his Combat Pool. His adjusted Target Number is 4. Rolling the 10 dice (6 + 4), he gets 3, 4, 3, 2, 5, 5, 1, 2, 6, and 5. Looking at the dice individually, he has the one 4, the three 5s, and the 6 equaling or exceeding the adjusted target number (4), for a total of 5 successes. If the adjusted target number had been 5, there would have been only 3 successes. Had the target number been higher than 6, say an 8, then only the 6 could have been re-rolled to try for the 8, per the Rule of Six. In that case, re-rolling only the 6, Liam would have needed to roll a 2 or better to get 1 success.
Defender Resistance Test
At this point, the target gets to make a Resistance Test to lessen the effects of the damage. To save his skin, the defender rolls a number of dice equal to his adjusted Body Attribute (including any dermal armor, p. 242), plus any dice still in his Combat Pool.
The target number for this test is the Power Rating of the attacking weapon, modified by any armor the character is wearing. To determine that adjusted target number, simply subtract the rating of the armor from the weapon’s Power. Any result less than 2 is considered a 2. Roll the dice, using the Rule of One/Rule of Six. It is recommended that dice from the Combat Pool be a different color than the Body dice. Each die that equals or exceeds the target number is counted as a success.
Keep track of the total number of successes, as well as how many of the Combat Pool dice also succeed.
This test is also referred to as the Damage Resistance Test.
Liam’s target, an unfortunate with the even less fortunate name of Snot, has a Body of 5 and is wearing 5 points of ballistic armor. Liam is firing his trusty Ares Predator heavy pistol, which has a Damage Code of 9M.
The target number for Snot’s Resistance Test is 4 (9 - 5). He is rolling 5 dice for his Body, plus any dice from his Combat Pool. Alas, he has none remaining.
The dice are rolled, resulting in 2, 3, 4, 4, and 6. Three of the dice score equal to or higher than 4, so Snot has three successes.
Determine Outcome of Attack
Compare the successes generated by the attacker and the target.
If the attacker’s successes exceed the target’s, the attacker can raise the base damage of the weapon upward. The base damage of the weapon rises by one Damage Level for every two full successes the attacker rolls over the target’s total.
All weapons are rated at one of the Damage Levels: (L)ight, (M)oderate, (S)erious, and (D)eadly, in that order. Increasing a weapon’s Damage Level shifts it to the next higher Damage Level. Decreasing a weapon’s Damage Level shifts it to the next lowest damage level. See also Damage Codes, p. 33.
Staging up 1 level per 2 successes → Light → (M)oderate → (S)erious → (D)eadly ← Staging down 1 level per 2 successes
If the attacker’s successes equal the target’s, the weapon does its base Damage Level.
If the target’s successes exceed the attacker’s, the target can reduce the weapon’s base damage downward. The base damage of the weapon drops by one Damage Level for every two full successes the target rolls over the attacker’s total. If the damage falls below Light, no damage occurs.
If the target’s Combat Pool dice alone are enough to exceed the attacker’s successes, the attack is a complete miss.
Comparing Liam’s and Snot’s successes, we find that Liam (the attacker, with 5) has generated 2 more successes than Snot (the defender, with 3). Liam therefore gets to stage the weapon’s damage upward. He has 2 net successes (2 more than Snot), which is enough to increase the Damage Level from “M” to “S.” Poor Snot takes a Serious wound.
If Snot had, by some chance, rolled 2 more successes than Liam, he would have been able to stage the weapon down one Damage Level, from “M” to “L,” and only taken a Light wound. He would have needed 4 more successes than Liam in order to take no damage (2 successes to reach Light, and then two more to eliminate it completely).
If both had scored the same number of successes, Snot would have taken a Moderate wound, the base damage of the weapon (9M).
If Liam had scored two more successes than he did, he would have been able to stage the Damage Level up 2 levels, “M” to “S,” and then “S” to “D,” giving his opponent a Deadly wound and blowing the...well, you get the idea.
Apply Damage
Record the damage on the target’s Condition Monitor, according to the rules on p. 111.
Stopping and Knockdown
A character struck by a ranged weapon may be knocked down by the blow. When struck, the character must make a Body Test against a target number equal to one-half the Power of the attack, round down. If the character can overcome a Threshold Number equal to one-half (rounding off) the amount of damage done (1 for a Light Wound, 2 for Moderate, and 3 for Serious), there is no effect.
If the character is unable to generate any successes, he falls down (prone).
If he generates successes, but does not overcome the Threshold Number, the character remains standing but takes a step or two (one meter) away from the direction of the attack.
This means, for example, that a character who has taken a Moderate wound must generate more than 2 successes in his or her Body Test to remain standing. With 1 or 2 successes, the character staggers or stumbles one meter away from the attack. If no successes are generated, the character falls down.
Gel rounds have a base target number equal to their Power. (See Ammunition Table, in the Gear section.)
Characters who take a Deadly wound are always knocked down.
Called Shots
Characters may “call shots” in an attempt to increase the damage their weapon will do. By calling a shot, the character is aiming at a vulnerable portion of a target, such as the head of a person, the tires or windows of a vehicle, and so on. It is up to the Gamemaster to determine if such a vulnerable spot is accessible.
When a shot is called, a few things can occur, at the player’s choice and with the Gamemaster’s agreement:
The Damage Code is increased by one level (L becomes M, M becomes S, and so on, up to a maximum of D). The character also suffers a +4 target modifier for the shot.
A specific sub-target of something vehicle-sized or larger can be hit, such as the windows or tires on a vehicle. Normal damage rules apply, but are used against the specific part of the vehicle. For the windows or tires, the Barrier Ratings would be used. The character receives the +4 modifier for this shot as well.
Only weapons that fire in single-shot, semi-automatic, and burst-fire modes are eligible for called shots.
A character can aim (see Simple Actions, p. 82) and then call a shot at the time of the attack. Calling the shot is a Free Action.
FIREARMS
Most ranged combat involves the use of firearms. The four types of firearms are those that fire in single-shot mode (SS), semi-automatic mode (SA), burst-fire (BF), and full-auto mode (FA). Some firearms are capable of firing in more than one mode.
FIRE MODE TABLE


Firearm Type
Fire Mode
Hold-out Pistol
Single-shot or semi-auto
Light Pistol
Semi-auto only
Taser
Single-shot or semi-auto
Heavy Pistols
Single-shot or semi-auto
Submachine Gun
Semi-auto, burst-fire, and/or full-auto
Shotguns
Semi-auto or burst-fire
Assault Rifle
Semi-auto, burst-fire, and/or full-auto
Sporting Rifle
Semi-auto only
Sniper Rifle
Semi-auto only
LMG
Burst-fire and/or full-auto
MMG and HMG
Full-auto only
Assault Cannon
Single-shot only

SINGLE-SHOT MODE
Weapons that fire in single-shot mode can usually fire only in that mode. Firing a single-shot mode firearm requires only a Simple Action, but that weapon cannot be fired again that Combat Phase.
Semi-Automatic Mode
Firearms that are capable of firing in semi-automatic mode can fire up to twice in one Combat Phase. Each shot requires a Simple Action. The first shot is unmodified, but the weapon has a +1 recoil modifier if a second shot is taken in that Combat Phase. This modifier can be, and usually is, neutralized by recoil compensation.
Each shot requires a separate Success Test. Each shot also requires a separate allocation of Combat Pool dice, if used.
Multiple Targets
If the attacker engages multiple targets in semi-automatic mode, the second target is at a +2 modifier.
BURST-FIRE MODE
In burst-fire mode, firearms spit out three bullets in rapid succession every time the trigger is pulled. Firing a weapon in burst mode is a Simple Action, which means that up to two bursts may be fired per Combat Phase.
Firing a weapon in burst-mode imposes a +3 recoil modifier per burst fired. This modifier can be neutralized with recoil compensation.
Make an individual Success Test for each separate burst, modified by dice from the Combat Pool, if desired. Each burst requires a separate allocation of Combat Pool dice. For the purposes of resolving burst damage, the weapon is considered to have a Power Level 3 points greater than listed, and its Damage Level goes up to the next level. Thus, an SMG weapon firing in burst-mode would have a Power Rating of 8 and a Damage Level of S.
Short Bursts
If, because of insufficient ammunition in the clip, the burst ends up being a round short, the Power Rating increases by +2, but the Damage Level does not increase. A +2 recoil modifier also applies.
If a burst consists of only one round, again due to insufficient ammunition, resolve it just as for a single-shot attack.
Multiple Targets
When engaging multiple targets in burst-mode, fire directed against a second target receives a +2 target modifier.
FULL-AUTO MODE
Weapons capable of firing in full-auto mode throw bullets for as long as the attacker depresses the trigger. This effect is affectionately referred to as the “lead hose.” Firing a weapon in full-auto mode is a Complex Action.
The attacker declares how many rounds are fired from the weapon at a specific target. This group of rounds is considered a “full-auto burst” and is resolved in a manner similar to burst-fire. Each round fired imposes a +1 recoil modifier for the entire group. This modifier can be reduced by recoil compensation. One test, modified by dice from the Combat Pool, is made to resolve each attack, each full-auto burst. The Power Rating of the weapon increases by 1 point for every round in that full-auto burst. The Damage Level of the weapon also increases by one level for every three full rounds in the full-auto burst, raising an M Damage Level to S, and then to D, if enough rounds are fired. A Damage Level of D is the maximum obtainable.
A minimum of three rounds must be fired with each burst. If the belt or clip runs short, see Short Bursts, above.
This is most certainly Wedge’s day. Six punks from the Halloweener gang decided to harass some innocent pedestrians whom Wedge decided (seconds ago) that he likes. Sure, he yelled a warning to the gangers, but is it his fault that his City Speak is so bad it sounded like something about dead mothers and fish?
The Halloweeners rush Wedge with a collection of knives and clubs. Wedge pulls his Ingram Valiant LMG from the back of his pick-up truck and holds down the trigger in full-auto fire.
Though nuts, he’s not completely insane. He limits his targets to the first three gangers, hitting each one with a full-auto burst, consisting of three rounds, three rounds, and four rounds, respectively.
The Valiant has a Damage Code of 7S, and this particular weapon is equipped with a Rating 3 gas vent system on the barrel and a shock pad on the stock, for a total of 4 points of recoil modification. The punks are all within 20 meters, making Wedge’s base Target Number a 4. The punks are walking, so there’s no movement modifier. There are, in fact, no situation modifiers at all, except for the laser sight on the LMG (did we mention that?). That means Wedge has a base Target Number of 3 (4 - 1).
The first punk gets a three-round burst, which increases the Damage Code of the weapon to 10D. The three-round burst qualifies for 3 points of recoil, which the weapon compensates for. Punk 1: Damage Code 10D, Target Number 3.
Punk 2 gets a three-round burst too, with a healthy Damage Code of 10D. Now, however, six rounds have been 
Punk 2 gets a three-round burst too, with a healthy Damage Code of 10D. Now, however, six rounds have been fired from the weapon, so the recoil modifier is 6. The weapon compensates for 3, leaving 3. This is the second target this Combat Phase, which adds another +2 modifier. Punk 2: Damage Code 10D, Target Number 8.
Punk 3 gets the four-round burst (lucky her) that has a Damage Code of 11D. The recoil modification is now +7 (10 - 3). Being the third target also means a +4 modifier added to the attack because of multiple targets. Punk 3: Damage Code 11D, Target Number 14.
Make a separate Success Test for each burst, with a separate allocation of Combat Pool dice, which Wedge has a lot of and which he uses primarily for the last two bursts because of their higher target numbers.
Multiple Targets
When engaging multiple targets in full-auto mode, the attacker must “walk” the fire from one target to the next. What this means is that one round is “wasted” for every meter of distance between the two targets. Smartguns never waste rounds.
The attacker also receives a blanket +2 target modifier for each new target engaged during that Combat Phase.
STRAY SHOTS (OPTIONAL)
Full-auto fire walked from one target to the next may result in stray shots striking an unintentional target. If a potential target is within the line of fire of a stray shot, roll 2 dice against a 4 if the potential target is within short range, 5 for medium range, 6 for long, and 9 for extreme. If 1 or more successes are rolled, resolve the hit normally, but give the attacker 1D6 more successes.
If more than one potential target lies within the line of fire, determine randomly the order in which they are checked.
Remember, each meter between targets produces one stray round, and smartguns never produce stray rounds.
AMMUNITION
Most weapons are capable of firing an assortment of ammunition types. The three most common are flechette, explosive, and gel (or stun) rounds.
Flechette Rounds
Instead of firing a single, solid slug, flechette rounds fire a large number of small, sharp metal fragments designed to rip and tear into a target. They are very effective against minimally or unarmored targets, but almost useless against those with any kind of armor protection.
Against unarmored targets, flechette rounds increase their damage by one level. That is, a heavy pistol (9M) firing a flechette round would have a Damage Code of 9S against unarmored targets.
Against armored targets, flechette rounds fare poorly. For the target’s Armor Rating, use either double its Impact Armor Rating or its normal Ballistic Rating, whichever is higher. Double the Barrier Rating of any barriers fired at and/or through (see Barriers, p. 98). Also double the value of any vehicle armor (p. 104).
The only effect of dermal armor, other than adding its rating to the character’s Body Attribute, is that it negates the Damage Level increase effects of flechette ammunition.
Explosive Rounds
Explosive rounds are solid slugs designed to fragment and explode on impact. Increase the Power Rating of any attack with explosive rounds by 1.
Attempts to fire through a barrier use twice the normal Barrier Rating of the material, but the barrier itself takes damage as if it had one-half its normal Barrier Rating. See Barriers for more information.
On the downside, explosive rounds will misfire whenever all of the Attack Test dice come up as ones, regardless of whether or not the test would otherwise have succeeded or failed. When this occurs, the character firing the weapon is immediately subjected to one “attack,” with a Damage Code equal to that of the normal round the weapon fires. Do not apply the explosive round adjustments. The character may make a Damage Resistance Test against the “attack,” but may not apply any dice from his Combat Pool. Roll 1D6 to determine the number of successes in the “attack.” The attack in progress misses.
Gel (Stun) Rounds
Gel rounds are special rounds designed to take down a target without seriously damaging it. They are usually semi-rigid slugs that flatten on impact, dispersing their kinetic energy over a larger-than-normal area. Gel rounds have a Power Rating 2 points less than listed for the weapon’s normal round and the same Damage Level, but all damage is Stun, not Physical. Impact, not Ballistic Armor, applies.
Gel rounds also have an increased chance of knocking the character down. See Knockdown in a later section.
RELOADING FIREARMS
Most firearms in Shadowrun hold ammunition in removable clips that can contain many bullets. Other guns offer a variety of reload methods, including break action, internal magazines, or cylinders (on revolvers). Heavy weapons use clips, or a multi-round belt feed. Grenade launchers, discussed shortly, use the internal magazine system. Missile and rocket launchers, also discussed shortly, use a break action. The type of system used determines how long it takes to reload the weapon.
Firearms, once reloaded, are considered ready. (See Actions, p. 82.)
Removable Clips
Identified by a notation of (c) on the Firearms Table, removable clips take one Simple Action to remove or insert. Using a Complex Action, a character can reload a number of rounds into a clip equal to his Quickness Rating.
Break Action
Identified by a (b) notation on the Firearms Table, a break action weapon requires one Complex Action for the insertion of two rounds. A break-action weapon usually hinges open near the firing mechanism (or the equivalent) to allow insertion of the rounds.
Internal Magazines
Identified by an (m) notation on the Firearms Table, an internal magazine weapon takes one Complex Action for the insertion of a number of rounds equal to the firing character’s Quickness Rating. Weapons with internal magazines usually have small ports on the side or top into which the rounds are inserted for storage and firing.
Cylinders
Identified by a (cy) notation on the Firearms Table, these systems can be reloaded at a rate of a number of rounds equal to the character’s Quickness, per Complex Action. The presence of a speed loader (see Firearm Accessories, p. 240) allows the contents of the loader (the maximum ammunition capacity of the weapon) to be loaded with a single Complex Action. Speed loaders themselves may be reloaded at the same rate as the weapon.
Belt Feed
Identified by a (belt) notation, a belt feed is a long belt of linked ammunition fed continuously through a weapon until the belt runs out. It takes one Complex Action to insert the belt into the weapon. Belts themselves may be reloaded at a rate equal to one-half the character’s Quickness Rating, per Complex Action.
SHOTGUNS
The shotguns described in the Gear chapter of this book (p. 236) fire slug rounds. It is possible to load them with shot rounds, but shot rounds have little effect in this era of body-armor technology.
Apply the flechette ammunition rules to the Damage Code indicated for the weapon. That sets the damage for a hit from a shot round from that weapon.
Shot rounds spread when fired, creating a cone of shot extending outward from the muzzle of the shotgun. This allows the shot to hit multiple targets, but with reduced effectiveness (the same number of shot pellets are spread out over a larger area). The mechanism that controls this spread is called the choke.
The user of the shotgun can set the choke of the weapon at anywhere from 2 to 10. What this number determines is how quickly the shot spreads. For every number of meters equal to the choke setting that the shot travels, it will spread one meter to either side of the center line of fire. That means a shotgun firing with a choke of 2 would catch targets along a one-meter-wide path for two meters, then a two-meter-wide path for another two meters, then a four-meter-wide path for another two meters, and so on. If the choke were 5, it would catch targets along a one-meter path for five meters, then a two-meter path until the ten-meter point, then a four-meter path until the fifteen-meter point, and then along a six-meter path until the twenty-meter point, and so on.
Every time a shot round increases its spread, it loses 1 point of Power. Every time the shot spreads, subtract -1 from the attacker’s target number. That means the first shot in the example above would be -2 Power/-2 target number at the six-meter point, while the second shot would be -2/-2 at fifteen meters, and then -3/-3 at twenty meters. When the Power reaches 0, the shot is considered ineffective and no further effects are determined.
SHOTGUN SPREAD EXAMPLE
Everything within the area of spread is considered a valid target, organic or inorganic, friend or foe. To resolve the actual attack, the attacker makes his Success Test, and then each of the targets makes his Resistance Test individually, comparing the results against the attacker’s successes from the single roll. See Resolving Ranged Combat, p. 87. There is an additional modifier for every other target within the spread in front of the target making the Resistance Test. If, for example, a character were standing back a bit and there were three other targets ahead of him within the spread (between the first character and the gun), that first character gets 3 extra dice for his Resistance Test.
For an extra +10 percent cost, the choke on a smart shotgun can be rigged for cybernetic adjustment. Shotguns firing shot rounds receive only a -1 from smartlinks, and no modifiers from smart goggles or laser sights.
PROJECTILE WEAPONS
PROJECTILE WEAPONS TABLE










Type
Concealability
Strength Minimum
Damage Code
Weight
Cost
BOWS










Standard Bow
2
1+
(STR Min + 2)M
1
100¥ × STR Min
Arrows
3
NA
As bow
.1
10¥
CROSSBOWS










Light
2
3
6L
2
300¥
Medium
2
4
6M
3
500¥
Heavy
NA
5
8S
4
750¥
THROWING WEAPONS










Non-Aerodynamic










Throwing Knife
9
NA
(STR)L
.25
20¥
Aerodynamic










Shuriken
8
NA
(STR)L
.25
30¥

Bows (regular and crossbows) and throwing weapons use the same ranged combat procedure as firearms (see p. 87). There are, however, some special rules that apply to these types of weapons.
Strength Minimum Rating
Bows and crossbows have Strength Minimum Ratings that indicate the minimum Strength a character must have to use that weapon. When attacking with a bow, characters below the Strength Minimum suffer an additional +1 target modifier per point below that number because of the difficulty they have in pulling the bow and nocking an arrow. The weapon’s Strength Minimum is used to determine the weapon’s range and damage.
If a character does not have the Strength Minimum for using a particular crossbow, he must spend one additional Ready Weapon action reloading the crossbow for each point of Strength he is below the minimum. A crossbow’s Strength Minimum Rating is used to determine its range.
Throwing Weapons
Throwing weapons have no Strength Minimum Rating; they use the thrower’s Strength Attribute to determine range and damage.
Projectile Weapon Types
Above is a list of some projectile weapons available in the Shadowrun universe. The listing is not intended to be exhaustive, but representative.
Note that bows are purchased with a specified Strength Minimum.
GRENADES
Grenades are inaccurate and unreliable in their effect, but can be extremely effective when used properly. A character can deliver grenades to a target by throwing them or firing them from a grenade launcher. In either case, the number-one priority of the attacker is to land the grenade as near the target as possible. Grenades, because of their shape and method of delivery, will scatter, bouncing and skittering across the ground. The better the throw or launch, the less the scatter.
Resolving a grenade attack is a two-step process. The first step determines where the grenade ended up when it exploded. Then, the effect of the grenade’s explosion, or blast, must be resolved.
Hitting the Target
To determine the grenade’s final location, first choose the intended target. Make a Success Test of the attacker’s appropriate Combat Skill against a base target number from the Grenade Range Table. Combat Pool dice can be applied.
Determine the range to the target in meters and cross-reference it with the type of grenade used. The number at the top of the corresponding range column is the base target number. That target number is modified by the same situation modifiers as for Ranged Combat (see p. 88). Roll the skill dice against the target number, and note the number of successes generated.
GRENADE RANGE TABLE










Type
Target Number






Scatter Dice


Short (4)
Medium (5)
Long (6)
Extreme (9)


Standard
0–STR × 3
to STR × 7
to STR × 15
to STR × 30
3D6
Aerodynamic
0–STR × 3
to STR × 7
to STR × 15
to STR × 30
2D6
Grenade Launcher
5–50
51–100
101–150
151–300
2D6

Determine Scatter
Next, the Gamemaster must determine the grenade’s base scatter. Because all grenades scatter to some degree, the number of successes generated in the Scatter Test are used to reduce the distance.
The Gamemaster determines the direction of the scatter by rolling 1D6 and consulting the Scatter Diagram below.
The large arrow indicates the direction of the throw, so a result of 1 means the grenade continued on past the target, while a result of 4 means the grenade has bounced back in the direction of the attacker. (Uh-oh!)
SCATTER DIAGRAM
[Diagram showing a circular layout with numbers 1–6 around a central point, with a large arrow indicating the direction of the throw. 1 is forward, 2–3 are to the right, 4 is back toward the attacker, 5–6 are to the left.]
Having determined the direction of the scatter, the Gamemaster next calculates the base distance of the scatter. The far right column of the Grenade Range Table indicates the number of dice rolled to find the scatter distance.
After that roll is made, the attacker reduces the scatter distance by two meters per success for standard grenades, and four meters per success for aerodynamic grenades and grenade launchers. If the scatter distance is reduced to zero or less, the grenade has detonated at the target. If the scatter distance is not reduced to zero, the grenade detonates at the remaining distance in the direction indicated.
Grenade Launcher Minimum Range
The short range for grenade launchers is given as five to fifty meters. This is because the mini-grenades fired from standard grenade launchers do not actually arm until they have traveled about five meters. They do not detonate if they hit anything before traveling that distance. This is a safety feature in case of accidental misfire.
Disarming this safety feature requires only a simple adjustment to the weapon, outside of the Combat Turn, but the character who wishes this adjustment should probably re-read the scatter rules.
Blast Effects
The next step is to determine the effects of the grenade’s explosion. Grenades are area-effect weapons, meaning that their blast will affect an area and any targets, be they friend or enemy, within that area. The target’s distance from the final location of the grenade, the blast point, is critical. The farther away the target, the less damage it takes, because a grenade’s blast effect is reduced by distance.
Different grenade types lose blast-effect at different rates. Consult the Grenade Damage Table below to find the grenade’s Damage Code as well as its blast reduction rate.
GRENADE DAMAGE TABLE




Type
Damage Code
Power Level Reduction
Offensive
10S
-1 per meter
Defensive
10S
-1 per half meter
Concussion
12M (Stun)
-1 per meter

As with other weapons, the first part of a grenade’s Damage Code is its Power Level. It is the Power that determines how likely the grenade’s blast is to affect the target. It is also the Power that is reduced with range. Thus, a target standing three meters away from an offensive grenade blast would be subject to a base 7S damage, while a target standing six meters away would be subject to a base 4S damage. If this were a defensive grenade instead, the first character would be subject to only a base 4S damage, while the second character would be out of the grenade’s blast effect entirely.
To resolve the effects of the grenade blast, roll the target’s Body dice against a target number equal to the adjusted Power of the grenade’s blast at that range, minus the Impact Armor Rating of the target. Combat Pool dice may be used to augment this test. Compare the defender’s successes against those from the attacker’s Success Test. If the attacker generates more successes, the Damage Level of the blast increases one level for every two successes over the target’s success total. If the defender generates more successes, the Damage Level of the blast is reduced one level for every two successes over the attacker’s success total.
Blast against Barriers
When a grenade’s blast hits a barrier such as a wall, door, or other similar structure, compare the remaining Power of the blast (reduced by range) against twice the Barrier Rating of the object, per the Barrier Rating Table, p. 98.
To find the blast’s effect on the barrier, consult the Barrier Effect Table, p. 98, below.
If the barrier falls, the blast continues on, but the Power Level is reduced by the original Barrier Rating. If the barrier does not fall, the blast may be channeled, as described under Blast in A Confined Space, below.
Demolitions
If a character uses Demolitions Skill to place explosive charges, treat the barrier as though it had a normal Barrier Rating. Also make a Demolitions Test against a Target Number 2. Successes from this test add to the effective Power of the explosives.
Blast in A Confined Space
Sometimes, grenades detonate in a confined space, such as a hallway or room. When this occurs, the Gamemaster must first determine whether any barriers (walls primarily) stood firm against the explosion. Consult the Blast against Barriers rules above. If the walls or doors hold, blast channeling occurs. If they do not hold, determine blast effects normally.
If the walls hold, the shock wave reflects off the wall, continuing back in the direction it came. If this rebounding shock wave maintains enough Power to reach a character, that character is subject to the appropriate blast. If this is the second time the character has been struck by the shock wave (once as it headed out and then again as it rebounded back), the Power of the blast is equal to the combined Power of the two waves. If, for example, the wave had a Power of 6 when first passing the character, and then a 2 after rebounding and hitting the character again, the effective Power of the attack would be 6 + 2, for an 8. Yes, this does mean that in a really small, really well-built room a detonating grenade could rebound repeatedly off each of the four walls, raising the effective Power of the blast to a value far higher than the original Power of the grenade. This is known as the chunky salsa effect.
Consult the diagrams below for some examples of confined blast grenade effects.
GRENADE BLAST DIAGRAM
[Diagram showing confined space blast effects, illustrating shock wave reflection and power accumulation.]
BARRIERS
Sometimes, a character will wish to attack through a barrier, either to get at a target on the other side or to create a hole through which he can move. The procedure for each is similar, but not the same.
BARRIER RATING TABLE


Material
Rating
Standard Glass
2
Cheap Material/Regular Tires
3
Average Material/Ballistic Glass
4
Heavy Material
6
Reinforced/Armored Glass
8
Structural Material
12
Heavy Structural Material
16
Armored/Reinforced Material
24
Hardened Material
32

Standard doors use the Barrier Rating of their construction material. Security doors have twice the rating of the material. Glass doors have the rating of the glass.
Firing Through
A character firing a ranged weapon at a target on the other side of a barrier is subject to the +8 Blind Fire Target Modifier because he cannot see the intended target. If the intervening barrier is transparent, the modifier does not apply.
Either way, the character makes the standard Success Test, except that the defender can subtract both his appropriate Armor Rating and the adjusted Barrier Rating of the barrier from the Power of the attack. Thus, a character wearing 3 points of armor and standing on the far side of a Barrier 4 would subtract a total of 7 from the Power of the attack.
If, however, the Barrier Rating exceeds the Power of the attack, the attack cannot penetrate and is stopped cold. Note, however, that this may still damage the barrier by reducing its rating.
Against blunt melee attacks such as fists, clubs, or other similar weapons, a barrier maintains its normal rating.
Against edged melee attacks, such as those made by swords and the like, the barrier has twice its normal rating.
Break Through
Characters will sometimes wish to break through a barrier, most commonly doors, to get at or through to the other side. This is resolved with a procedure similar to the one used in Blast against Barriers except that the barrier has twice its normal Barrier Rating against firearm rounds and other ranged attacks. This is to account for the fact that even though a bullet is powerful, it really does punch only a tiny hole.
BARRIER EFFECT TABLE


Power of Attack
Effect
Power less than ½ adjusted Barrier Rating
No effect, barrier holds, minor cosmetic damage.
Power equal to or greater than ½ adjusted Barrier Rating, up to the rating
Barrier damaged; reduce Barrier Rating by 1.
Power greater than adjusted Barrier Rating
For every increment equal to half the Barrier Rating that the Power exceeds that rating, a one-half meter hole is opened and the Barrier Rating reduced by 1.

Against melee attacks, a barrier has twice its normal Barrier Rating. Against combat magic spells, barriers use twice their normal rating. Against damaging manipulation spells, they use the normal Barrier Rating.
A regular door will break open when its Barrier Rating is reduced to one-half. A security door must be reduced to 0 before it will break open.
Always use the base Power Rating of the round, unmodified for burst or full-auto fire, for comparison against the Barrier Rating.
MISSILE LAUNCHERS
Occasionally, characters get their hands on military-grade missile and rocket launchers. Both use the same kind of launcher (called a missile launcher for convenience), but the two have inherent differences.
Rockets
Rockets are rocket-shaped projectiles consisting of little more than a light metal or plastic body with stabilizing fins, a propulsion system (usually solid-chemical), and a warhead. They are considered to be dumb weapons, as they go only where pointed and have no internal or external guidance capability.
Rockets come in three types: High-Explosive Rockets (HER), Anti-Personnel Rockets (APR), and Anti-Vehicle Rockets (AVR).
High-Explosive Rockets (HER)
High-explosive rockets are designed to do heavy damage to a large area. Their blast pattern is similar to that of a grenade but covers a greater area. They are not particularly effective against hardened targets such as vehicles or protected military structures. HERs use the standard grenade rules for blast and its effects.
Anti-Personnel Rockets (APR)
Anti-personnel rockets are, as the name implies, used principally against people. On impact, the warhead discharges high-speed metal or plastic-metal fragments designed to tear into unprotected flesh. APRs are very effective against unprotected individuals but fairly ineffective against barriers, structures, and vehicles. APRs use the rules under Flechette Rounds, p. 93.
Anti-Vehicle Rockets (AVR)
Anti-vehicle rockets contain a shape-charged warhead designed to burn or blast its way through a vehicle or barrier. Though a blast is associated with the impact, it is limited compared to something like that of a HER. Against AVRs, the Barrier Rating of a barrier is halved (round down), as is the Armor Rating for vehicles (round down).
Missiles
Missiles are basically rockets, with two differences: they carry internal guidance and tracking systems, and are much more expensive. Because of their sophisticated electronics, missiles are considered to be smart weapons. The onboard electronics assist the firer in acquiring and hitting the target.
Like rockets, missiles come in three types: high-explosive (HEM), anti-personnel (APM), and anti-vehicle (AVM). The warhead types follow the same rules as their rocket counterparts.
MELEE COMBAT
Whenever two or more characters engage each other in hand-to-hand or armed combat, the melee combat system rules apply. Melee combat in Shadowrun assumes that some maneuvering occurs as part of the actual combat. Each attack is not a single blow but a series of moves and counter-moves executed by those involved. Even so, for simplicity, the character who initiates the attack (the character whose action it is) is considered to be the “attacker.” The opponent is considered to be the “defender.”
RESOLVING MELEE COMBAT
To resolve a melee combat encounter, follow the procedure outlined below. Detailed explanations follow the list of steps.
Make Attacker’s Test
Roll the attacker’s base Combat Skill dice, augmented by dice from his Combat Pool, against a base Target Number 4, modified as appropriate. Count the successes.
Make Defender’s Test
Roll the defender’s base Combat Skill dice, augmented by dice from his Combat Pool, against a base Target Number 4, modified as appropriate. Count the successes.
Compare the Successes
The character who rolls the most successes has hit his or her opponent. A tie goes in favor of the attacker.
Determine Damage
The character who hit can increase the Damage Level of his attack by one level for every two full successes he rolls above his opponent’s success total.
Resist Damage
Roll the hit character’s Body dice against a target number equal to the attacker’s weapon-modified Strength, minus the target’s Impact Armor Rating. For every two successes rolled, the Damage Level is reduced by one level.
MELEE COMBAT WEAPONS
Melee combat weapons are any weapons wielded in close fighting, that is, when the combatants are within a few meters of each other. In some cases, the weapons may be thrown, but if the weapon is actually swung, melee combat is used. The Melee Weapons Table lists the melee weapons, and their game attributes, available to Shadowrun characters.
Following the table are explanations of the terms used.
MELEE WEAPONS TABLE












Concealability
Reach
Damage
Weight
Cost
Edged Weapons










Katana
3
1
(STR + 3)M
1
1,000¥
Knife
8
0
(STR)L
0.5
30¥
Sword
4
1
(STR + 2)M
1
500¥
Pole Arms/Staves










Pole Arm
2
2
(STR + 3)S
4
500¥
Staff
2
2
(STR + 2)M Stun
1
50¥
Clubs










Club
5
1
(STR + 1)M Stun
1
10¥
Sap
8
0
(STR + 2)M Stun
—
10¥
Stun Baton
4
1
6S Stun
1
750¥
Other










Hand Razor
—/10*
0
(STR)L
—
4,500/9,000¥
Spurs
—/9*
0
(STR)M
—
7,000/11,500¥
Unarmed
NA
0
(STR)M Stun
NA
NA
Whips/Flails










Monofilament Whip
10
2
10S
—
3,000¥

*Concealability when extended.
Concealability measures how easy or difficult it is to conceal the weapon. This rating becomes the target number for Perception Tests directed at noticing the weapon. See Perception, p. 185. The asterisk under Hand Razor and Spurs indicates their respective Concealability Ratings when extended.
Reach is a measure of how long a weapon is. If one character’s weapon Reach exceeds another, he receives a -1 to his target number for each point his weapon’s Reach exceeds his opponent’s. Moreover, his opponent receives a +1 to his target number for each point his weapon’s Reach is inferior to his opponent’s. Trolls have a natural Reach of +1 that is cumulative with weapon Reach.
Damage indicates the overall Damage Code of the weapon. Most melee weapons, with the exception of the monofilament whip (whose effect has nothing to do with the force with which it is wielded), have a base Power equal to the Strength of the wielder, plus some value. This is expressed, for example, as STR + 2, which gives 2 additional points to the wielder’s Strength for the Power of the attack. The higher the weapon’s Power Rating, the harder it is for the target to resist the damage of the attack. The second part of the Damage Code is a letter, either L (Light), M (Moderate), S (Serious), or D (Deadly), which indicates the level of damage done. See Damage Codes, p. 110, for more information.
Weight indicates the weight of the weapon in kilograms.
Cost is the base cost of the weapon in Nuyen.
Attacker’s Success Test
The attacker player rolls a base number of dice equal to his character’s Combat Skill, against a base Target Number 4. Dice from the Combat Pool may be added to this roll. The base target number may be modified by the situation. See the Melee Modifiers Table below. Following the table are further explanations of the situations listed.
Every die roll result equal to or greater than the modified target number qualifies as a success. Keep track of the total number of successes.
MELEE MODIFIERS TABLE


Situation
Modifier
Character has friends in the melee
-1/friend (max -4)
Opponent has friends in the melee
+1/friend (max +4)
Visibility impaired
Consult the Visibility Table
Character is wounded
Injury Modifier
Character’s weapon has longer Reach
-1/point longer
Character’s weapon has inferior Reach
+1/point shorter
Character attacking multiple targets
+2/target
Character has superior position
-1
Opponent prone
-2

Friends in the Melee
This modifier applies primarily to large melees with more than one participant. The character only receives the modifier if he or his opponent has allies involved in the same fight. Having allies nearby is not good enough; they must be actually participating in the same brawl. See also Multiple Opponents, this page.
Visibility Impaired
Consult the Visibility Table, p. 89, using the modifiers at half their value, rounding down, except for Full Darkness.
Character Wounded
See Damage and Healing, p. 110.
Reach
See the explanation of Reach under Melee Combat Weapons, p. 100.
Multiple Targets
See the Multiple Targets rules, p. 92.
Superior Position
A character has a superior position if he is standing on higher ground (at least one-half meter) than his opponent, if he is standing on steady, stable ground while the opponent is not, or if the opponent is in a tight, restricted position and the character is not.
Opponent Prone
If the opponent is lying on the ground, this modifier applies.
Defender’s Success Test
Make the defender’s Success Test in the same way as for the attacker, with the same situation modifiers. Keep track of the total number of successes.
Compare Successes
After both sides make their tests, compare the successes generated by each character. The one who generates the most successes has hit his opponent. Subtract the opponent’s successes from the winner’s to get the net number of successes. Ties go to the attacker.
The net number of successes determines how much potential damage is done.
Zipperhead and Geist are facing off in some dark alley somewhere in the sprawl. Zipper has Unarmed Combat 5, Body 5, and 4 dice available in his Combat Pool. Geist has Unarmed Combat 4, Body 5, and 5 dice available in her Combat Pool. Both are making tests against a Target Number 4 (no situation modifiers apply). Both will use all their Combat Pool dice to assist their attack.
Zipperhead rolls 9 dice, resulting in a 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Three of the dice beat a 4, so ole Zip has 3 successes. Geist rolls 9 dice, resulting in a 1, 1, 2, 2, 4, 4, 5, 5, and 6. Geist has 5 successes.
Geist has more successes than Zipperhead, so she hits. If Zipperhead had rolled more successes, he would have hit. If they had both generated the same number of successes, the tie would have gone in Geist’s favor.
Determine Damage
The character who generates the most successes, the winner, can attempt to use those successes to increase the damage his weapon does. The weapon’s Damage Level is increased by one level for every 2 net successes. Ties are assumed to do the base damage of the weapon.
The damage Geist does is based on the 2 successes she rolled above Zipperhead’s success total. Her unarmed Damage Code is 4M Stun (her Strength is 4), so she can use her 2 successes to raise, or stage, the Damage Code up one level to Serious Stun.
Damage Resistance Test
The character who was hit now attempts to resist the damage. He or she rolls Body dice against a target number equal to the opponent’s weapon-modified Strength, minus the character’s Impact Armor Rating. Every 2 successes stages, or reduces, the Damage Code of the weapon by one level.
Zipperhead rolls his 5 Body dice against a base Target Number of 4 (Geist’s Strength), minus the 2 points of impact armor he wears. This gives him a final target number of 2. Rolling his 5 dice, he gets a 1, 1, 2, 4, and a 6. Three of those dice are higher than 2, so Zipperhead has made 3 successes.
Every 2 successes he generates will stage his damage down one level from where Geist staged it (Serious Stun). Because Zipperhead has 3 successes, not 4, he can only reduce the Damage Code by one level, to Moderate Stun. Zipperhead takes a Moderate Stun wound.
Multiple Targets
Characters may attack more than one opponent with a Complex Action. Each attack uses the base Combat Skill dice of the character, plus dice from the Combat Pool, if desired. The target number for each attack is increased by +2 per additional target the character strikes in that Combat Phase. If a character is attempting to strike two targets, for example, the first attack is at the calculated target number, and the second at an additional +2.
Dice from the Combat Pool must be allocated separately for each attack.
Multiple Opponents
Characters may often find themselves outnumbered in a fight. When this occurs, the number of friends on hand becomes extremely important. In such a situation, total up the number of characters within one meter or so who are fighting in the same fight as the character. If six friends are around, but they are all spread out fighting their own combats, they are going to be of no help against the character’s opponent. They do count, however, if they are near the character and fighting against the same opponent(s). Total up the number of “friends” on each side. The side with the greater number of friends gets a target number modifier of -1 for each friend more than their opponents, maximum of -4. The side with the lesser number of friends suffers a +1 target number modifier for each additional friend their opponents have, maximum of +4.
As characters physically move away, or are taken out of the fight, they are removed from the count of “friends.”
Called Shots
Characters using melee weapons may call shots, per the rules on p. 92.
Full Defense
Characters may choose, when attacked, to defend only themselves. When doing so, they may not add any Combat Pool dice to their Attack Success Test, but may add dice to their Damage Resistance Test. When using this option, a clean miss occurs if the target’s successes from Combat Pool dice alone exceed the attacker’s successes, regardless of any other dice result or the Damage Code of the weapon.
Knockback and Knockdown
Characters struck in melee combat may be knocked back, and possibly down, by the blow. When struck, a character must make a Body Test against a target number equal to his opponent’s Strength. If the character can overcome a Threshold Number equal to one-half (round off) the amount of damage done (1 for a Light Wound, 2 for Moderate, and 3 for Serious), there is no effect.
If he generates successes, but does not overcome the Threshold, the character steps directly backward one meter. If for some reason he cannot step backward (a wall perhaps), he will fight at a +2 target modifier until able to move away.
If the test generates no successes, the character falls down (prone).
A character who has suffered a Moderate wound would have to make more than 2 successes on his Body Test to remain standing where he is. If he generates 1 or 2 successes, he steps backward one meter. If he makes no successes, he falls down.
Subduing
Sometimes it is necessary to subdue and control an opponent without beating him into unconsciousness. To do so, the attacker must engage in subduing combat.
To subdue a character, resolve combat normally, except that an additional +2 modifier applies to the target number and that all damage done must be Stun damage. When one of the characters takes damage to the “Unconscious” level, he or she is considered to be subdued and under the control of the victorious character. The losing character never actually falls unconscious, however. Because this was subduing combat, the damage done during the combat is removed from the Condition Monitor at a rate of one box per minute if the control is not maintained.
The subduing character can attempt to maintain the damage on the Condition Monitor (to keep control of the defeated character) by making an Unarmed Combat, Strength, or Quickness Test against a target number equal to the defeated character’s Unarmed Combat, Strength, or Quickness, whichever is lowest. Each success restores one box of subduing damage to the Condition Monitor.
The defeated character can try to resist this by making an opposed roll using the same rules as above, but with injury modifiers and an additional +2 modifier applied to the target number. The dominant character can choose to make this maintenance roll as often as he wishes.
The victorious character must declare subduing combat at the start of the combat. At any time during the combat, the initiating character may decide to stop subduing and to fight normally. If this occurs, it removes all subduing combat damage from the Condition Monitor. It is not necessary for all the participants in a fight to be engaged in subduing combat, however. All injury modifiers due to the subduing damage are applied normally.
Subduing can only be performed with weapons that do Stun damage.
Monofilament Whip
This weapon is uncommon, and feared, on the streets of the 2050 era. Though not truly monomolecular, the monofilament whip is capable of inflicting significant damage. The weapon consists of a short haft that holds the monofilament line when not in use. The line itself is able to extend out to two meters, hence the +2 Reach adjustment.
The whip action, the presence of a weighted tip, and the danger of the monofilament line itself all make wielding the weapon difficult, at best. If an attack misses solely because the target’s Combat Pool dice successes exceed the attacker’s successes (a possibility only if the optional Full Defense rule is in use), the attacker risks being hit by the whip. When this occurs, make a separate Armed Combat Test against a Target Number 6. If the test yields no successes, the attacker is struck by his own whip.
The attacker, now the target, must make a Damage Resistance Test (Body dice plus Combat Pool dice) against the standard Damage Code of the weapon, 10S. Successes from the Damage Resistance Test stage the damage down one level for every 2 successes.
Impact armor is used to defend against the monofilament whip, but its rating is halved (round down). Barrier Ratings are doubled against a monofilament whip.
SHOCK WEAPONS
Shock weapons include both melee-combat stun batons and ranged-combat tasers. Both work on a similar principle, their effect relying on a contact-discharge of electricity rather than kinetic energy. The damage each causes is Stun, and combat with a stun baton (melee) or taser gun (ranged) is handled according to the normal rules for that type of weapon.
An additional effect of a successful hit by a stun weapon is that the target is stunned for a number of Combat Turns equal to the Power of the attack, minus one-half (round down) any impact armor worn, and minus the successes generated from a Body or Willpower (whichever is greater) Test made against a Target Number 4. This state of disorientation imposes an additional +2 target modifier to all tests for the duration.
Impact armor is used against shock weapons, except that its rating is halved, rounding down.
VEHICLES AND COMBAT
Shadowrun is not a vehicle combat game, but characters do sometimes engage in combat involving vehicles.
VEHICLE RATINGS
Vehicles have Attribute Ratings much like those of characters. Vehicle ratings are on their own scale, however, and not directly compatible with character ratings.
Following are explanations of Handling, Speed, Body, Signature, and Autopilot, the ratings Shadowrun uses for vehicles.
Handling refers to the maneuverability of the vehicle. The higher the rating, the more difficult it is to control the vehicle.
Speed is a split rating that gives the standard cruising speed and then the vehicle’s top speed, in meters per Combat Turn. To determine the vehicle’s speeds outside of a Combat Turn, multiply the listed speed by 1.2. The result is in kilometers per hour.
Body is the measure of the vehicle’s structural ruggedness and also acts as a guide to its relative size.
Armor rates the vehicle’s protection against weapon damage. Vehicle armor acts as a combination of the kind of standard armor characters wear and as a Barrier Rating. See Vehicles, Weapons, and Magic for more information, p. 106.
Signature represents the vehicle’s vulnerability to electronic and thermal detection. The higher the rating, the harder it is to detect the vehicle.
Autopilot represents the autopilot’s ability to control the vehicle and perceive threats to its progress.
VEHICLE CONTROL RIGS
To become a rigger requires the ability to use a piece of cyberware known as a vehicle control rig (VCR). This equipment allows the rigger to cybernetically command a vehicle by jacking directly into it or to operate the vehicle remotely via a remote-control deck. The vehicle control rig gives the rigger advantages such as bonuses to Reaction and Initiative, plus the Control Pool.
Rigger/Vehicle Initiative
A rigger only receives the Reaction and Initiative bonuses for the vehicle control rig while cybernetically controlling a vehicle. This may be by direct link into the vehicle, or through a remote link via a rigger deck. Other types of Reaction- or Initiative-enhancing cyberware or magics do not assist the rigger while jacked in.
Vehicle Actions and Commands
It requires a Complex Action to command a single vehicle, regardless of how many are under control at that time. A rigger may be controlling two drones, for example, but may only command one of them directly with a Complex Action. If, however, more than one drone is receiving an identical command—“Leave the area” or “Attack this target,” for example—the rigger may command them as a group.
If a drone or remote patrol vehicle (RPV) has an autopilot, the rigger can issue it one-sentence commands such as “Circle this area,” “Shoot anyone who comes through this door,” “Follow that car,” and the like. The more specific and detailed the command, the greater the chance the autopilot will become confused, however.
The Gamemaster should rate the command’s complexity (use the Skill Success Table, p. 68), then tell the rigger player the target number for the test, giving him the option of downgrading the complexity before actually issuing the command. (It can be assumed that by the year 2053 computers can clearly understand and interpret plain English-language structure. It can also be assumed that the rigger knows the capability of the autopilot.)
The Gamemaster then makes a test, rolling the vehicle’s Autopilot Rating against the target number. Only one success is needed for the drone to execute the instruction. The more successes rolled, the more latitude the drone has in interpreting the command (to the benefit of the rigger). The Gamemaster may even permit the rigger to decide what the drone does in the face of a circumstance that runs somewhat counter to the rigger’s instructions.
It is best to assume that the drone is what is commonly referred to as a “dog-brain,” that is, capable of responding to commands like an exceptionally intelligent, highly trained dog. The higher the Autopilot Rating, the smarter the dog-brain.
TERRAIN
The kind of terrain through which a vehicle is moving affects its performance. A sports car traveling across wide, open salt flats is going to cover a lot more ground than if it were winding through traffic in downtown city streets. In the same manner, an aircraft traveling through clear skies is going to have a better time of it than if there was a terrible storm in progress.
The Shadowrun game rates terrain types in terms of Open, Normal, Restricted, and Tight, with regard to the type of vehicle involved. Obviously, what is Tight for a sports car is not the same as what is Tight for an aircraft (at least not until technology advances a little bit further).
Open terrain means flat areas without buildings, trees, or other significant features. Highways qualify as Open. For aircraft, this means cloudless skies, and for boats, smooth water.
Normal terrain means typical countryside and winding roads, mostly open, but with some obstacles. For aircraft, it means partly cloudy skies, and for boats, light seas.
Restricted terrain can be suburban streets, light woods, hilly areas, and so on. Fog, rain, or darkness can change Normal terrain to Restricted. Overcast skies and rain constitute Restricted terrain for aircraft, and high seas for boats.
Tight terrain includes urban mazes, badlands, and dense woods. Mist, glare, or low light changes Restricted terrain to Tight, and smoke, heavy fog, or total darkness change Normal to Tight. High winds constitute Tight conditions for aircraft and boats.
The Gamemaster must set the terrain type for any vehicle in which action occurs, determining whether it is possible to change terrain types at that time.
VEHICLE COMBAT
Shadowrun is a roleplaying game, and the vehicle combat system reflects that. It is not intended to be an accurate, detailed simulation of vehicle combat. Instead, it is a means by which the key elements of vehicular pursuit can be gamed in a relatively simple, fast manner.
In this system, many of the actions, events, and results of an actual pursuit have been abstracted for ease of play. For example, it is assumed that the speed of the vehicles involved is appropriate for the type of vehicle and the terrain through which they are traveling. The actual speed need never be stated.
Vehicle Combat Turn
Vehicles use the same Combat Turn as regular characters. There are, however, some differences. Use the Combat Turn Sequence, from p. 78, but add the following subsections as needed.
Determine Initiative
Before determining Initiative, resolve A and B below for riggers. Once that has been done, determine Initiative normally.
A. Allocate Control Pool Dice
The rigger must decide which dice from the Control Pool will be available for the remainder of the Vehicle Turn, and which are to be used for the Position Test.
B. Make Position Test
Make a Position Test, explained below, for all vehicles involved in the Combat Turn. Roll the appropriate Vehicle Skill, plus Control Pool dice, against the Handling of the vehicle, modified by the terrain. The outcome depends on the successes and whether the vehicle is fleeing, pursuing, or fighting.
Resolve Actions
Character actions are resolved normally, but within the parameters defined in Resolving Actions, p. 106, below.
Begin New Combat Turn
Prior to beginning a new Combat Turn, riggers must make an Escape Test.
A. Make Escape Test (End of Turn)
Riggers who choose Flight in the Position Test may now attempt to escape completely. See Escape Tests, p. 107, for more information.
Allocating Control Pool Dice
A rigger with a Control Pool must now decide how many of its dice he will use in the next step, the Position Test. The rest of the dice may be reserved for other uses, as needed.
The Control Pool refreshes at the beginning of each of the rigger’s actions, but the player removes the dice spent in the Position Test each time the pool refreshes.
Making the Position Test
At the beginning of every Combat Turn and before determining Initiative, players must make Position Tests for vehicles involved in that Turn. The purpose of the test is to determine the relative position of the various vehicles engaged in the combat. Each driver involved may have a different intention in the test, these being Fleeing, Pursuit, or Fight.
Fleeing involves maneuvering the vehicle to escape from combat or any pursuers. The driver’s objective is to widen the distance between the vehicles so that escape is possible.
Pursuit is just the opposite. A pursuing driver wants to catch up to a fleeing vehicle to prevent it from escaping.
A driver who chooses Fight is primarily interested in getting a clear shot at the opponent, or more correctly, as many clear shots at the opponent as he can manage. Getting the shot is the primary concern.
The various sides choose their individual intentions in secret, only revealing their choices after making the Position Tests.
To make the Position Test, roll the Vehicle Skill of the driving character against a target number equal to the vehicle’s Handling Rating, modified by the type of terrain on which the vehicle is traveling. Consult the table below. If the driver of the vehicle has a Control Pool, he may add any dice allocated to the Position Test at the beginning of the Turn roll.
Determine each side’s successes. What each side does with their successes depends on whether their intention was flight, pursuit, or combat.
POSITION TEST MODIFIERS


Terrain
Modifier
Open
0
Normal
+1
Restricted
+2
Tight
+4

Fleeing Vehicles
Each success in the Position Test allows the fleeing vehicle to travel a number of meters equal to its cruising speed. If, for example, the driver of a vehicle with a cruising speed of 20 rolled 4 successes on the Position Test, he would travel eighty meters.
Additionally, for every 2 successes generated, each character in the vehicle can spend one full action conducting attacks against a pursuing vehicle (subject to weapon availability and so on). If 6 successes are generated, characters in the vehicle can spend up to three actions each to attack a pursuing vehicle. A character who is only eligible for two actions that Combat Turn will still have only two actions, however. Only if the character had three or more eligible actions could he use all three actions on a roll of 6 successes.
There is also a chance that at the end of this Combat Turn the fleeing vehicle evades pursuit and escapes. See Escape Test, p. 107, for more details. Keep track of the number of successes generated in the Position Test because it will affect the Escape Test.
Pursuit
Vehicles in pursuit use Position Test successes in the same way as fleeing vehicles, except that they are able to close a distance equal to the vehicle’s cruising speed multiplied by the number of successes. They also get to attack the fleeing vehicle once for every 2 successes generated.
Keep track of the number of successes generated in the Position Test for use in the Escape Test later in the Turn.
Fight
The Fight option is the choice of warriors. In choosing this option, the player character may have to maneuver the vehicle out of position, in terms of flight or pursuit, in order to make the attack.
Vehicles intending to fight may make a number of attacks against the opposing vehicle equal to the number of successes generated in the Position Test.
For every 2 successes, they also get to open or close the distance between themselves and the other vehicle by a number of meters equal to the vehicle’s cruising speed.
Relative Distances
When one vehicle closes on another by traveling a greater distance than the other vehicle in that Combat Turn, the driver may choose the final distance between the two vehicles. Say, for example, that the vehicles begin the Combat Turn with 20 meters between them. The fleeing vehicle travels another 30 meters, while the pursuing vehicle travels 45 meters. The pursuing vehicle has gained 15 meters on the fleeing vehicle, cutting the distance between them to 5 meters. The pursuing vehicle could, in this situation, choose the final distance between them as anything between 5 meters (the maximum gain) and 20 meters (the original distance between them).
Vehicles closer than 1 meter are in a potential ram situation. The collision only occurs, however, if the driver of one of the vehicles chooses to spend a Complex Action ramming the other vehicle. See Ramming, below.
Airborne Vehicles and Terrain
When a mix of ground and airborne vehicles are involved, such as when a helicopter is chasing a motorcycle, it is likely that the encounter will include more than one terrain type. The Gamemaster may wish to take into account factors like building height and the like when determining the type of terrain for each vehicle. For example, the motorcycle might be traveling through Restricted suburban streets, while overhead the helicopter might very well be in Open terrain. If, however, the motorcycle were traveling the streets of downtown (Tight terrain), the helicopter might also be traveling in Tight terrain because of the height of buildings.
Determining Initiative
Now it is time for the participants to determine Initiative, in the usual manner. Characters using vehicle control rigs to operate a vehicle may add the Reaction and Initiative bonuses gained from that piece of cyberware. Also apply any Initiative modifiers related to vehicle damage at this time, reducing the driver’s effective Reaction.
The rigger determines only one Initiative total, regardless of the number of vehicles being controlled. The rigger’s Initiative is equal to the lowest Initiative result for all the vehicles under control. Obviously, if they all have the same damage status, the numbers will come out the same. If the vehicles have different damage statuses, use the number for the vehicle in the worst condition.
Resolving Actions
Player characters involved in the Combat Turn may now take actions as they come to their appropriate Combat Phases. Remember, each character can only conduct a limited number of attacks against the opposing vehicle, based on the results of the Position Test.
Crash Test
The driver must also make a Crash Test at the end of his last action if he spent no action controlling the vehicle anytime during the Turn. The Crash Test is resolved in the same manner as described above.
If a vehicle takes so much damage from weapons that it is destroyed, the result is an automatic crash.
Ramming
When the distance between two vehicles is less than one meter, one of the drivers involved can choose to ram the other vehicle. In other words, the driver of one vehicle is attempting to force the other to make a Crash Test. The Control Pool applies.
To resolve the ram, make a test for each of the two vehicles, rolling dice equal to the driver’s Vehicle Skill, plus Body, plus one-half vehicle armor (round down), minus the vehicle’s Handling. The target number is equal to the Body of the opposing vehicle, plus one-half its vehicle armor, minus a terrain modifier.
Apply the modifier for the terrain in which the pursuing vehicle is traveling. (It is, of course, very difficult to escape from aircraft.)
The vehicle that generates the least number of successes must make a Crash Test. If there is a tie, there is no crash.
TERRAIN MODIFIER TABLE


Terrain
Modifier
Open
-2
Normal
0
Restricted
+2
Tight
+4

VEHICLES, WEAPONS, AND MAGIC
Weapons use the same Damage Codes against vehicles (hard targets) as they do against other characters (soft targets), but with some differences and restrictions.
Against vehicles without vehicle armor, a vehicle’s Body counts as composite armor (impact and ballistic) and reduces the Power of the attack. Otherwise, resolving weapon damage is the same. The vehicle’s Body also determines the number of dice rolled when resisting damage. A weapon’s Damage Code is also reduced by one level (D to S, S to M, M to L). Weapons rated as Light are unable to affect vehicles unless using special ammunition or when attacking for something vital (see Called Shots, p. 92).
In attacks against vehicles with vehicle armor, the armor acts as a Barrier Rating. That is, if the base Power of the weapon, unmodified by burst or full-auto fire, does not exceed the rating of the vehicle armor, it will not penetrate.
The Power and Damage Codes for grenades and other explosives are affected in the same manner, with the exception of anti-vehicle rockets and missiles. Those weapons have a semi-armor-piercing warhead and do not have their Damage Level reduced, but the Power is reduced by the vehicle’s armor.
When resisting damage, a driver whose vehicle has vehicle armor rolls a number of dice equal to the Body of the vehicle, plus one-half the vehicle armor against a target number equal to the Power of the weapon, minus the Body plus vehicle Armor Ratings. Riggers may allocate dice from their Control Pools if they choose.
Shooting at Moving Targets
For attacks against a moving target, consult the table below for additional maneuvering-based modifiers. Compare the speed of the firing vehicle or the vehicle from which the character(s) is firing against the speed of the target.
Stationary attackers have a speed of 5. When using the vehicle combat rules, p. 105, compare the vehicles’ cruising speeds.
MOVING TARGET TABLE


Relative Speeds
Modifier
Target’s speed less than or equal to Attacker’s
0
Target’s speed up to twice the Attacker’s
+2
Twice to three times higher
+4
More than three times higher
+6

Breaking Windows
Though the Shadowrun vehicle damage system does not use specific damage locations, it is sometimes necessary to know whether or not a vehicle’s windows have shattered.
It is assumed that civilian vehicles taking Moderate damage have one or more windows blown out or shattered. Military and security vehicles, on the other hand, have reinforced windows that do not shatter or blow out until the vehicle takes Serious damage.
Aircraft whose windows have shattered or blown out must immediately descend to a safe, oxygen-rich altitude. Because none of the Shadowrun vehicle systems are concerned with altitude, this is more a note for roleplaying.
Combat Spells against Vehicles
Only physical combat spells that do physical damage can affect vehicles. Mana spells affect minds and living things, while physical spells affect physical things.
A physical combat spell cast against a vehicle has a Target Number 8 because of the machine’s complex technological and electronic nature. The vehicle resists damage by making a standard Spell Resistance Test in the same manner as a person in that vehicle can attempt to resist the casting magician’s successes. The dice rolled for the vehicle’s Resistance Test is equal to its Body, plus one-half any vehicle armor. The target number for this test is equal to the Force of the spell.
A player can allocate Spell Defense dice to assist a vehicle. In some instances, this is a particularly efficient use of these dice. (See Spell Defense Dice, p. 132.)
If the casting magician’s Spell Success Test produces extra successes beyond what the vehicle’s Spell Resistance Test produced, damage is done. Damage is calculated in the same manner as for damage against characters.
Gamemasters and players are referred to Spells and Astral Space, p. 149. Keeping that section in mind, vehicles have simple, limited auras that make them vulnerable to physical combat spells. The attempt is difficult; hence the high target number. A vehicle is considered a single, complete entity. Its wheels and windshield, for example, are not directly connected and may be constructed from different materials, but they are interrelated components. Because of a vehicle’s “aural wholeness,” a mage cannot use magic to selectively target an individual portion of the vehicle. Single-target combat spells like bolt and missile spells affect a vehicle in the same manner as an area-effect spell. A magician cannot cast an area-effect spell and then catch individual parts of the vehicle in order to attack them separately.
Damaging Manipulations against Vehicles
Damaging manipulation spells do damage against vehicles as if they were regular weapons, and are treated as such. They do not, however, suffer the reductions in Power and Damage Code.
Hitting Walls
Sometimes, vehicles hit things their drivers don’t wish them to. Under certain conditions this is simulated in the Combat Turn by the Crash Test. At other times, a different system is necessary to determine the result of an impact.
Let us say that Nick Nightmare on his Aurora racing bike is roaring through the Seattle night with visions of some form of barely legal debauchery filling his tiny mind. Unknown to Nick, a wiz-kid mage has erected a barrier spell in Nick’s path. Blindly, and with an anticipatory grin on his face, Nick races straight into it.
What happens depends on exactly what type of barrier spell it was.
If the wiz-kid cast a straight mana barrier spell, Nick would have some problems. Not being living, the Aurora racing bike is unaffected by the mana barrier spell and roars on into the night. Whether Nick is still seated on it is another question entirely.
Nick hits the mana barrier as if he were hitting a wall. The speed at which he hits that wall is the speed at which his bike was traveling. Treat the barrier like an actual, physical wall with a Barrier Rating equal to the Force of the spell. When Nick hits the barrier, he may take damage.
The Power of the impact is equal to the speed of the vehicle in meters per Combat Turn, divided by 10 (round down). Thus, if Nick were traveling at the bike’s maximum of 210 meters per Combat Turn, the Power would be a nasty 21. If he were traveling at its cruising speed of 70 meters per Combat Turn, it would be a 7. (By the way, two bikes hitting head-on would add their individual speeds together to get the net speed of the impact.) The damage is calculated exactly as for Crash Tests, so consult that section to determine the Damage Code, which is also speed-based.
If this incident were to occur as part of the Combat Turn (say, as the result of an action by an imaginative magician), then the vehicle’s cruising speed would be used to find the Power.
Hitting this barrier, poor Nick would face the equivalent of a 21D attack. He can make a normal Damage Resistance Test. If he is aware of the impact, he may add dice from his Combat Pool. If Nick had been traveling at a more leisurely 70 meters per Combat Turn, the Damage Code would be 7S. Note that armor does not help Nick because this is a mana spell that ignores the armor.
See the Blast against Barriers section, p. 97, for handling damage against walls. Spells whose Barrier Rating (Force) drops to 0 are knocked down. If the spell is not knocked to 0, it automatically rebuilds itself during the casting magician’s next action.
If Nick had been traveling in an enclosed car, he and the vehicle would have blithely passed through the mana barrier spell, completely unaffected by it.
If the barrier spell were physical or a wall, the Aurora would also be in trouble. In fact, the bike would hit the barrier before Nick, and that impact would have to be resolved before dealing with the effect on Nick. All other values remain the same as for Nick, but the vehicle makes its Damage Resistance Test with its Body dice, plus one-half its vehicle armor, rounding down.
If the barrier breaks as a result of the impact (is reduced to 0), Nick must make a Crash Test, per p. 107. If the barrier does not break, Nick (or the passenger of any vehicle) suffers an attack of the same Power as the bike, but at one Damage Code Level less.
VEHICLE DAMAGE
Vehicles use a standard Condition Monitor marked off in Condition Levels of Light, Moderate, Serious, and Destroyed. Just as a regular character receives modification based on his damage status, so does a vehicle.
The table below indicates the effects of damage on vehicles.
The vehicle damage modifier applies to all tests that actually involve the vehicle.
The Initiative modifier reduces the effective Reaction of the character controlling the vehicle.
The Speed modifier reduces the vehicle’s cruising speed and maximum speed.
VEHICLE DAMAGE MODIFIERS






Vehicle Damage
Target Number
Initiative Modifier
Speed
Light
+1
-1
No change
Moderate
+2
-2
75%
Serious
+3
-3
50%

DAMAGE AND HEALING
As one might expect, Shadowrun characters can get hurt. What kind of damage, how bad an injury, and how much it affects the character varies greatly.
TYPES OF INJURY
Damage occurs as one of two types: Physical and Stun. The two types of damage are kept track of separately.
Physical Damage
Physical Damage is the most dangerous of the two. It is the kind of damage done by guns, explosions, bladed or sharp weapons, and most magic spells. If the Damage Code of a weapon does not indicate either Physical or Stun damage, the weapon does Physical damage. Weapons that do Stun damage always say so.
As one might expect, Physical damage takes the most time to heal.
Stun Damage
Stun damage is usually bruising damage, muscle fatigue, and the like, and is the kind done by fists, kicks, blunt weapons, stun rounds, shock weapons, concussion grenades, spellcasting fatigue, and as the effect of some magic spells. If something does Stun damage, its Damage Code will always say Stun.
Stun damage heals fairly quickly, but its immediate effects can be as deadly as Physical damage.
DAMAGE CODES
As discussed previously, all weapons have Damage Codes that indicate how difficult it is to avoid or resist the damage, and how serious are the actual wounds the weapon causes. For convenience, those rules are reviewed here, as well as expanded upon.
A weapon’s Damage Code consists of two parts, a numeral for the Power and a letter for the Damage Level. Damage Codes are always listed as: 4L, 10M, 6D, and so on.
Power
A weapon’s Power is the first part of the Damage Code. This number is used as the target for any Success Tests to avoid or resist the damage caused by the weapon. It is often modified by some resisting value, such as body armor.
If, for example, a character is hit by a weapon with a Power of 6, the target number for the character’s Success Tests to avoid or resist the damage would be 6, assuming the number was not modified by the presence of armor.
Damage Level
The second part of the Damage Code is the Damage Level. This letter code indicates the base severity of the damage done by the weapon. The four possible levels are “L” for Light, “M” for Moderate, “S” for Serious, and “D” for Deadly.
Everything else being equal, a character struck by a weapon with a given Damage Level (L, M, S, or D) will take a Light, Moderate, Serious, or Deadly wound, as appropriate. Usually, however, the Damage Level is increased or reduced in some manner before the damage is applied to the character. This process is known as staging.
APPLYING DAMAGE
The attacking character, using the successes generated from his Success Test, can stage the weapon up one Damage Level for every 2 successes generated. So, if he is using a weapon that has a base Damage Level of M and if he has generated 4 successes in his Success Test, the attacking character could stage the weapon’s damage to D (2 successes increase the Damage Level to S and 2 more increase it to D).
The target or defending character is trying to do just the opposite. The defender wants to stage the weapon damage down. The weapon’s Damage Code can be staged down one level for every 2 successes the defender generates. If, for example, the defender generated 4 successes against a weapon doing Serious damage, the damage would become Light (2 successes stage it down to M, and 2 more stage it to L).
The successes of the participants are usually compared, and the character with the higher net successes wins and stages the damage accordingly. See Resolving Ranged Combat, p. 87, and Resolving Melee Combat, p. 100, for information and procedures related to those types of combat.
If the weapon damage is staged below Light (the level is already at L and at least 2 more successes remain to be used for staging), then no damage is done. On the other end of the spectrum, deadly damage is the highest level of damage possible.
Once the damage has been staged, the character is subject to any damage that remains. This remaining damage is recorded on the character’s Condition Monitor. The Condition Monitor has two columns: Physical and Stun. Physical damage is recorded in the Physical column and Stun damage in the Stun column.
The number of boxes filled in on the monitor depends on the final, staged Damage Code of the weapon. Consulting the table below, one can see that a previously unharmed character taking either Physical or Stun damage would have 1 box filled in if the weapon did Light damage, 3 boxes if Moderate damage, 6 for Serious, and all 10 for Deadly.
Damage is cumulative, so a character who already has 3 boxes filled in (from a Moderate wound) and who takes another Moderate wound would then have a total of 6 boxes filled in, for the equivalent of a Serious wound. If the character had taken a Light wound, he would have 4 boxes filled in (3 + 1), and if he had taken a Serious, he would have a total of 9 boxes filled in.
DAMAGE LEVEL TABLE


Damage Type
Number of Boxes Filled In
Light
1
Moderate
3
Serious
6
Deadly
10

Exceeding the Condition Monitor
What happens when the total number of boxes filled in within a column (Physical or Stun) exceeds 10? If the damage is Stun, it then carries over into the Physical column. That is, a character who has already taken a Serious Stun wound (6 boxes) takes another Serious Stun hit. Serious does 6 boxes, so the last 4 boxes in the Stun column would be filled in, and the remaining 2 boxes would be filled in on the Physical column. If there was already damage in the Physical column, this damage is treated as if it were additional Physical damage and added to the existing damage. When the Stun column is exceeded, the character also falls unconscious. Consciousness is not regained until Stun damage is healed and the damage removed from the Stun column. See Healing, p. 112.
If the Physical column is exceeded, the character is in trouble. Overflowing the Physical column means the character is near death. Instant death occurs only if the Physical column is exceeded by more than the character’s natural Body Rating. If the character takes more damage than 10 plus his Body Rating, he or she is dead.
Characters who have exceeded their Physical column, but not by more than their Body Rating, can still survive if they receive prompt medical attention. If unattended, the character takes an additional box of damage every 10 minutes. If this exceeds the character’s Body Rating plus 10 before medical help arrives, the character is dead. See Deadly Wounds and First Aid, p. 115, for the rules governing medical aid to characters in that condition.
DAMAGE MODIFIERS
The Damage Modifiers Table shows what effect injury has on a character’s attempts to use skills and abilities and how it affects his Initiative total.
The Injury Modifier is a universal target number modifier that applies to nearly all Success Tests the injured character may attempt, except those involving attempts to resist damage or avoid damage.
The Initiative Modifier is applied to the character’s Reaction before Initiative dice have been rolled. If the Initiative Modifier reduces the Character’s Reaction to 0 or less, the character cannot take any actions that Combat Turn.
DAMAGE MODIFIERS TABLE




Damage Level
Injury Modifier
Initiative Modifier
Uninjured
None
None
Light
+1
-1
Moderate
+2
-2
Serious
+3
-3
Deadly
Unconscious or Near Death
—

HEALING
Healing takes time. The more injured a character is, the longer it takes. Stun and Physical damage heal differently, and at different rates.
Healing Stun Damage
Technically, overcoming Stun damage is more a process of recovery than healing because Stun is not actual, real, damage. How long Stun takes to recover is based on the amount of Stun damage taken, and the results of a Body or Willpower (whichever is higher) Test. To recover from Stun damage, roll either Body or Willpower dice against a base Target Number of 2. This target number is modified by any Injury modifiers, Stun or Physical, the character currently has.
Actual recovery of a box of Stun damage takes a base time of 60 minutes. The actual time it takes to recover 1 box of Stun damage is equal to the base time, divided by the number of successes generated. After this period has elapsed, the character has recovered 1 box of Stun damage, and the damage is erased from the Condition Monitor. A character who has been knocked unconscious from Deadly Stun will not wake up until his or her Stun damage is reduced to Serious. To recover from Stun damage, the character must be resting completely. If this resting time is interrupted, the recovery process aborts and the character will have to make the Body or Willpower Test again, using his current condition. The result can never be better than the result of the first roll, however.
Resting is the only way that Stun damage can be recovered. No medical treatment really helps, nor does any magical spell currently known to man. Stim patches provide a temporary solution, with definite long-term drawbacks. See Stimulant Patch, p. 250 of the Gear chapter.
Healing Physical Damage
Physical damage takes much longer to heal than Stun damage. Though Physical damage often heals without the benefit of medical attention, that is not always the case. When the adventure is over, or when a sufficiently long time-break occurs within the story, each wounded character makes a Body Test against a target number set by his or her overall wound level. Only the character’s natural Body Rating should be used; cyberware doesn’t help.
WOUND TABLE


Wound Level
Target Number
Light
2
Moderate
4
Serious
6

If the test yields any successes, the character heals without medical attention. If the test results in no successes, medical attention is required for healing to occur. Deadly wounds always require medical attention.
The effects of First Aid and Magical Healing (see p. 115) should be applied before making the test for medical attention.
Stages of Healing
Actual healing occurs in stages, with each one stage reducing the character’s damage by one level. After one stage of healing, Deadly would become Serious, Serious become Moderate, and so on. When one Damage Level is healed, the Condition Monitor drops to the lowest point for the next Damage Level. A character who has a Serious wound drops to having only 3 boxes filled in when his Condition Level is reduced to Moderate, no matter how many Serious damage boxes had been filled in.
Healing takes time, and it will also take money, if a doctor is involved. To determine how long it takes a character to heal one Damage Level, consult the Healing Table.
HEALING TABLE








Damage Level
Base Time
Min. Time
Target Number
Min. Lifestyle
Deadly
30 days
3 days
10
Hospitalized
Serious
20 days
2 days
8
High
Moderate
10 days
1 day
6
Middle
Light
24 hours
2 hours
4
Low

To determine how long healing actually takes, make a Body Test against the appropriate target number from the table. There are some modifiers. If a doctor is involved (one with a real medical degree, not just Biotech Skill), consult the Doctoring Table below. If the character is unable to support the Minimum Lifestyle required for healing, he suffers additional modifiers based on his condition (Gamemaster discretion). Lifestyle cost can be paid for daily. Simply divide the cost for the month by 30. See Lifestyles, p. 189, for more information.
Divide the successes from the Body Test into the base time to determine the actual healing time. Regardless of the results of the test or the quality of care, the actual time can never be lower than the Minimum Time listed on the table.
DOCTORING TABLE


Situation
Modifier
Intensive care (hospital only)
-2
Long-term magical care
-2
Conditions (only one applies)


Not in hospital or clinic
+2
Bad conditions
+2
Terrible conditions
+4
Patient is magician
+2
Patient’s natural Body Attribute is


1–3
+0
4–6
-1
7–9
-2
10 or more
-3
Patient’s natural Willpower Attribute is


1–3
+0
4–6
-1
7–9
-2
10 or more
-3

*Not including magical spell-based or cybernetic modifications.
Medical Costs
If there is a doctor involved, there is probably a bill to pay. Consult the Medical Costs Table immediately following to determine the fiscal damage.
MEDICAL COSTS TABLE


Service
Cost
Paramedic first aid for:


Deadly wound
400¥
Serious wound
200¥
Moderate wound
100¥
Light wound
50¥
Doctor’s services for:


Deadly wound
400¥ per day
Serious wound
200¥ per day
Moderate wound
100¥ per day
Light wound
50¥ per day
Hospitalization Lifestyle (Includes doctor’s services)
Per Lifestyle rules (p. 189)
Intensive Care (Deadly wounds only)
1,000¥ per day

Deadly Wounds and Permanent Damage
When a character suffers a Deadly wound, there is a chance of permanent damage to a vital organ, limb, or biological system. Make a Body Test (dermal armor counts) against a Target Number 4. If a trauma patch was used, apply a +2 modifier.
0 Successes: Bad luck. Some vital organ, body part, or system has been gravely damaged. The patient must be kept under continuous treatment by another character with Biotech Skill even if the wounded character has been stabilized. Double the time for the entire healing process. A replacement organ of one kind or another must be transplanted. This requires drastic invasive surgery and a replacement organ (see Pieces and Parts). Roll 1D6 for the actual damage result:
Die Roll
Result
1
Lose 1 point of Body
2
Lose 1 point of Strength
3
Lose 1 point of Quickness
4
Lose 1 point of Intelligence
5
Lose 1 point of Willpower
6
Lose 1 point of Reaction

The Attribute points lost in this manner cannot be recovered, though they can be replaced by cybernetic or other means. The loss of an Attribute point in this manner drops the character’s Racial Maximum for that Attribute by 1 point.
1 Success: A limb or eye has been mangled beyond its ability to heal. A replacement is required, either natural or cyber. This adds to the normal healing costs and may mean having to wait to get the replacement before healing can begin. Increase the base healing time by 50 percent. This requires major invasive surgery and a replacement eye or limb (see Pieces and Parts). Roll 1D6 for the actual damage result:
Die Roll
Result
1
Lose right arm
2
Lose left arm
3
Lose right leg
4
Lose left leg
5
Lose an ear (Roll 1D6: 1-3 right ear, 4-6 left)
6
Lose an eye (Roll 1D6: 1-3 right eye, 4-6 left)

2 or More Successes: The character takes no limb or organ damage.
Pieces and Parts
When a character loses a body part and needs a replacement, the part might not be immediately available. Those who want a complete DNA match will have to have the part grown. (Of course, a DocWagon™ platinum service contract includes a “donor counterpart” that can provide material for immediate transplant starting three months into the contract.)
Transplants have varying degrees of compatibility with the recipient. Over time or when subjected to severe stress (like more Deadly damage), the transplant may fail, requiring another replacement. The Gamemaster decides when to invoke the possibility of failure, so be nice and kiss up often.
BODY PART TYPES




Body Part
Base Time to Grow
Cost
Eye or Small Organ
3 weeks
7,500¥
Large Organ
5 weeks
15,000¥
Hand/Foot
6 weeks
15,000¥
Limb
8 weeks
25,000¥

In addition to the type of replacement, a variety of different grades exist, at varying availability, compatibility, and costs. The best is clonal (a precise duplicate of the character’s own part), while the worst is secondhand (somebody else’s part; don’t ask).
BODY PART GRADES






Grade
Availability
Compatibility
Cost
Clonal
Must grow
100%
Base × 2
Type O
3 in 6
90%
Base
Type G
5 in 6
75%
Base × 0.8
Secondhand
Always
30–65% (3D6 × 5%)
Base × 0.4
Compatibility
Chance of Failure Under Stress




100%
No chance




90–99%
3 or less on 2D6




70–89%
4 or less on 2D6




40–69%
5 or less on 2D6




10–39%
6 or less on 2D6





Clonal parts that must be grown can be force-grown through a special process. To determine the actual time, divide the Force Growth Rating (a player-chosen maximum of 10) into the part’s base time to grow. Forced Growth increases the part cost and rating, however, and reduces the compatibility by the rating in percentage.
Cyber Replacements
Cyberware can be installed to replace the damaged or lost body part. See the rules for Elective Surgery, for implanting cyberware.
ELECTIVE SURGERY
Surgery does damage. Medical technology will not let a patient die on the table, but one cannot just bop into a clinic, get a full dermal armor implant, and then jog out the next day to kick butt. Recovery takes a while.
Minor cosmetic surgery gives a character a Light wound. This covers anything that does not cost Essence, and consists of minor plastic surgery not involving the eyes, muscles, or nervous system. Examples are a nose job or an ear-bobbing.
Minor invasive surgery gives a character a Moderate wound. Minor surgery includes anything costing up to 0.4 points of Essence, or any cosmetic surgery involving the whole body, eyes, muscles, or nervous system. Getting a crest that can be raised or lowered (nerve connections required) or a whole-body skin graft would come under this category.
Major invasive surgery gives a character a Serious wound. Any procedure costing 0.41 to 0.99 points of Essence is major. This category also includes any organic limb replacements or eye transplants. New eyes are blind until fully healed from this surgery.
Drastic invasive surgery leaves a character with a Deadly wound, but the condition is stable and the character will not die. Drastic surgery is any procedure costing 1 or more points of Essence. This category also includes any organ transplants. Magicians are required to check for Magic loss after healing (see p. 115).
Calculate the Essence costs of all the cyberware the character is having installed at the same time. (The character cannot have additional cyberware installed until all healing is complete, so he may as well do it all at once.) Surgery costs do not include the cost of recovery!
FIRST AID
For the times when a wound cannot wait for professional medical assistance, the Biotech Skill is used for first aid. It can reduce wounds that are not Deadly, or stabilize Deadly wounds until the character can be taken to a doctor. Biotech only helps Physical damage, not Stun. Stun can only be recovered by resting.
In order to be effective, first aid must be applied during the “golden” first hour following an injury. Regardless of the success, first aid is no longer of any use once magical healing has been applied.
To apply first aid, make a Biotech Success Test against a target number that corresponds to the injured character’s current Damage Level from the First Aid Table. Then apply the target number modifiers that follow.
FIRST AID TABLE




Condition Level
Target Number
Treatment Time
Light
4
10 minutes
Moderate
6
20 minutes
Serious
8
30 minutes
Deadly
10
Special


TARGET NUMBER MODIFIERS


Situation
Modifier
Patient is a magician
+2
Bad conditions
+1
Terrible conditions
+3
Patient’s Body Attribute


1–3
+0
4–6
-1
7–9
-2
10 or more
-3
No medkit available
+4

If the test results in at least 1 success, the Damage Level is reduced by one level. The Damage Level can never be reduced by more than one level through first aid. To determine how long the first aid treatment takes, divide the Biotech successes into the treatment time. The result is the number of uninterrupted minutes the treatment takes. Any serious interruption aborts the first aid process, but it can be repeated.
Deadly wounds can only be stabilized by first aid. See Deadly Wounds and First Aid immediately below for more information. Stabilization of a patient with a Deadly wound must be maintained continually until professional help can be administered.
Deadly Wounds and First Aid
Special rules come into play when using first aid on a character with a Deadly wound. Because the character is suffering terrible wounds, first aid can only stabilize; it cannot heal. Even then, there is the chance that the character will die while being treated.
A Biotech Test is necessary, just as for regular first aid. If the test produces at least 1 success, the character stabilizes and stops taking an additional box of damage every 10 minutes, as indicated in Exceeding the Condition Monitor, p. 111. Should the test fail, make a natural Body Test for the wounded character against a Target Number 10. If the test succeeds, the character’s body stabilizes itself. If both tests fail, the character will die once his or her Body Rating has been exceeded. Again, see Exceeding the Condition Monitor.
Professional help, once it reaches the character, allows another Biotech Test and character Body Test. In this case, professional help is defined as a source of medical attention better equipped (such as a hospital or clinic) or with a better Biotech Skill Rating (such as a DocWagon™ paramedic) than that offered by the character who initially administered the first aid.
Trauma Patches
A last-ditch alternative is available to stabilize characters in danger of imminent death. The trauma patch is an adhesive patch that is placed against the patient’s skin directly over the heart. The patch administers measured, controlled doses of high-powered medicines designed to stabilize an injured body. When a trauma patch is applied, the character is allowed an additional natural Body Test to stabilize. The Target Number for this test is 4, plus the rating of any dermal armor or blood filters present (both restrict the flow of medicine). Success leaves the character stable, and stops the accumulation of additional damage boxes.
The trauma patch is used only as a last resort, because it could have lasting ill-effects on the patient. See the section Deadly Wounds and Permanent Damage, p. 114.
MAGICIANS AND DAMAGE
Magicians have it rough when they get hurt. Doctors and medics have a harder time treating them because they cannot use their high-tech gear and high-powered medicines on the patient without risking damage to the character’s Magic Rating. A magician can be treated without the +2 modifier (see First Aid Table), but then a test has to be made for Magic loss.
When a magician suffers a Deadly wound, or is treated without the +2 modifier, there is a risk of a loss of Magic. Roll 2D6. If the result is less than or equal to the magician’s current Magic Rating, 1 point is lost permanently. If the magician is being treated for a Deadly wound and the +2 modifier is not observed, check twice for Magic loss.
If a magician requires a replacement limb or organ, it must be cloned from the original tissue. Any other DNA pattern, even that of another magician, will reduce the character’s Power-handling capability and automatically reduce the character’s Magic Rating by 1. This can be temporary, in that a non-cyber substitute can be replaced later with a limb or organ cloned from the magician’s tissue. This restores the lost points of Magic Rating, but organ implants do Deadly surgical damage, and consequently pose the risk of even greater Magic loss.
Magical Healing
The Treat spell must be applied within one hour of the injury to be of any effect. The Heal spell can be administered at any time.
Successful use of either spell precludes the use of additional healing or treating spells, or of first aid.
Treat and Heal spells will reduce Physical overflow damage.




VEHICLE COMBAT
POSITION TEST
The first thing to do in a vehicle combat situation is for each participant to make a Position Test to determine his or her intent—whether the intention was flight, pursuit, or combat.
POSITION TEST MODIFIERS


Terrain
Modifier
Open
0
Normal
+1
Restricted
+2
Tight
+4

Fleeing Vehicles
Each success in the Position Test allows the fleeing vehicle to travel a number of meters equal to its cruising speed. If, for example, the driver of a vehicle with a cruising speed of 20 rolled 4 successes on the Position Test, he would travel eighty meters.
Additionally, for every 2 successes generated, each character in the vehicle can spend one full action conducting attacks against a pursuing vehicle (subject to weapon availability and so on). If 6 successes are generated, characters in the vehicle can spend up to three actions each to attack a pursuing vehicle. A character who is only eligible for two actions that Combat Turn will still have only two actions, however. Only if the character had three or more eligible actions could he use all three actions on a roll of 6 successes.
There is also a chance that at the end of this Combat Turn the fleeing vehicle evades pursuit and escapes. See Escape Test, p. 107, for more details. Keep track of the number of successes generated in the Position Test because it will affect the Escape Test.
Pursuit
Vehicles in pursuit use Position Test successes in the same way as fleeing vehicles, except that they are able to close a distance equal to the vehicle’s cruising speed multiplied by the number of successes. They also get to attack the fleeing vehicle once for every 2 successes generated.
Keep track of the number of successes generated in the Position Test for use in the Escape Test later in the turn.
Fight
The fight option is the choice of warriors. In choosing this option, the player character may have to maneuver the vehicle out of position, in terms of flight or pursuit, in order to make the attack.
Vehicles intending to fight may make a number of attacks against the opposing vehicle equal to the number of successes generated in the Position Test.
For every 2 successes, they also get to open or close the distance between themselves and the other vehicle by a number of meters equal to the vehicle’s cruising speed.
Relative Distances
When one vehicle closes on another by traveling a greater distance than the other vehicle in that Combat Turn, the driver may choose the final distance between the two vehicles. Say, for example, that the vehicles begin the Combat Turn with 20 meters between them. The fleeing vehicle travels another 30 meters, while the pursuing vehicle travels 45 meters. The pursuing vehicle has gained 15 meters on the fleeing vehicle, cutting the distance between them to 5 meters. The pursuing vehicle could, in this situation, choose the final distance between them as anything between 5 meters (the maximum gain) and 20 meters (the original distance between them).
Vehicles closer than 1 meter are in a potential ram situation. The collision only occurs, however, if the driver of one of the vehicles chooses to spend a Complex Action ramming the other vehicle. See Ramming, below.
Airborne Vehicles and Terrain
When a mix of ground and airborne vehicles are involved, such as when a helicopter is chasing a motorcycle, it is likely that the encounter will include more than one terrain type. The Gamemaster may wish to take into account factors like building height and the like when determining the type of terrain for each vehicle. For example, the motorcycle might be traveling through Restricted suburban streets, while overhead the helicopter might very well be in Open terrain. If, however, the motorcycle were traveling the streets of downtown (Tight terrain), the helicopter might also be traveling in Tight terrain because of the height of buildings.
Determining Initiative
Now it is time for the participants to determine Initiative, in the usual manner. Characters using vehicle control rigs to operate a vehicle may add the Reaction and Initiative bonuses gained from that piece of cyberware. Also apply any Initiative modifiers related to vehicle damage at this time, reducing the driver’s effective Reaction.
The rigger determines only one Initiative total, regardless of the number of vehicles being controlled. The rigger’s Initiative is equal to the lowest Initiative result for all the vehicles under control. Obviously, if they all have the same damage status, the numbers will come out the same. If the vehicles have different damage statuses, use the number for the vehicle in the worst condition.
Resolving Actions
Player characters involved in the Combat Turn may now take actions as they come to their appropriate Combat Phases. Remember, each character can only conduct a limited number of attacks against the opposing vehicle, based on the results of the Position Test.
CRASH TEST
The driver must also make a Crash Test at the end of his last action if he spent no action controlling the vehicle anytime during the turn. The Crash Test is resolved in the same manner as described above.
If a vehicle takes so much damage from weapons that it is destroyed, the result is an automatic crash.
RAMMING
When the distance between two vehicles is less than one meter, one of the drivers involved can choose to ram the other vehicle. In other words, the driver of one vehicle is attempting to force the other to make a Crash Test. The Control Pool applies.
To resolve the ram, make a test for each of the two vehicles, rolling dice equal to the driver’s Vehicle Skill, plus Body, plus one-half vehicle armor (round down), minus the vehicle’s Handling. The target number is equal to the Body of the opposing vehicle, plus one-half its vehicle armor, minus a terrain modifier.
Apply the modifier for the terrain in which the pursuing vehicle is traveling. (It is, of course, very difficult to escape from aircraft.)
The vehicle that generates the least number of successes must make a Crash Test. If there is a tie, there is no crash.
TERRAIN MODIFIER TABLE


Terrain
Modifier
Open
-2
Normal
0
Restricted
+2
Tight
+4

VEHICLES, WEAPONS, AND MAGIC
Weapons use the same Damage Codes against vehicles (hard targets) as they do against other characters (soft targets), but with some differences and restrictions.
Against vehicles without vehicle armor, a vehicle’s Body counts as composite armor (impact and ballistic) and reduces the Power of the attack. Otherwise, resolving weapon damage is the same. The vehicle’s Body also determines the number of dice rolled when resisting damage. A weapon’s Damage Code is also reduced by one level (D to S, S to M, M to L). Weapons rated as Light are unable to affect vehicles unless using special ammunition or when attacking for something vital (see Called Shots, p. 92).
In attacks against vehicles with vehicle armor, the armor acts as a Barrier Rating. That is, if the base Power of the weapon, unmodified by burst or full auto fire, does not exceed the rating of the vehicle armor, it will not penetrate.
The Power and Damage Codes for grenades and other explosives are affected in the same manner, with the exception of anti-vehicle rockets and missiles. Those weapons have a semi-armor-piercing warhead and do not have their Damage Level reduced, but the Power is reduced by the vehicle’s armor.
When resisting damage, a driver whose vehicle has vehicle armor rolls a number of dice equal to the Body of the vehicle, plus one-half the vehicle armor against a target number equal to the Power of the weapon, minus the Body plus vehicle Armor Ratings. Riggers may allocate dice from their Control Pools if they choose.
Shooting at Moving Targets
For attacks against a moving target, consult the table below for additional maneuvering-based modifiers. Compare the speed of the firing vehicle or the vehicle from which the character(s) is firing against the speed of the target.
Stationary attackers have a speed of 5. When using the vehicle combat rules, p. 105, compare the vehicles’ cruising speeds.
MOVING TARGET TABLE


Relative Speeds
Modifier
Target’s speed less than or equal to Attacker’s
0
Target’s speed up to twice the Attacker’s
+2
Twice to three times higher
+4
More than three times higher
+6

Breaking Windows
Though the Shadowrun vehicle damage system does not use specific damage locations, it is sometimes necessary to know whether or not a vehicle’s windows have shattered.
It is assumed that civilian vehicles taking Moderate damage have one or more windows blown out or shattered. Military and security vehicles, on the other hand, have reinforced windows that do not shatter or blow out until the vehicle takes Serious damage.
Aircraft whose windows have shattered or blown out must immediately descend to a safe, oxygen-rich altitude. Because none of the Shadowrun vehicle systems are concerned with altitude, this is more a note for roleplaying.
Combat Spells against Vehicles
Only physical combat spells that do physical damage can affect vehicles. Mana spells affect minds and living things, while physical spells affect physical things.
A physical combat spell cast against a vehicle has a Target Number 8 because of the machine’s complex technological and electronic nature. The vehicle resists damage by making a standard Spell Resistance Test in the same manner as a person in that vehicle can attempt to resist the casting magician’s successes. The dice rolled for the vehicle’s Resistance Test is equal to its Body, plus one-half any vehicle armor. The target number for this test is equal to the Force of the spell.
A player can allocate Spell Defense dice to assist a vehicle. In some instances, this is a particularly efficient use of these dice. (See Spell Defense Dice, p. 132.)
If the casting magician’s Spell Success Test produces extra successes beyond what the vehicle’s Spell Resistance Test produced, damage is done. Damage is calculated in the same manner as for damage against characters.
Gamemasters and players are referred to Spells and Astral Space, p. 149. Keeping that section in mind, vehicles have simple, limited auras that make them vulnerable to physical combat spells. The attempt is difficult; hence the high target number. A vehicle is considered a single, complete entity. Its wheels and windshield, for example, are not directly connected and may be constructed from different materials, but they are interrelated components. Because of a vehicle’s “aural wholeness,” a mage cannot use magic to selectively target an individual portion of the vehicle. Single-target combat spells like bolt and missile spells affect a vehicle in the same manner as an area-effect spell. A magician cannot cast an area-effect spell and then catch individual parts of the vehicle in order to attack them separately.
Damaging Manipulations against Vehicles
Damaging manipulation spells do damage against vehicles as if they were regular weapons, and are treated as such. They do not, however, suffer the reductions in Power and Damage Code.
Hitting Walls
Sometimes, vehicles hit things their drivers don’t wish them to. Under certain conditions, this is simulated in the Combat Turn by the Crash Test. At other times, a different system is necessary to determine the result of an impact.
Let us say that Nick Nightmare on his Aurora racing bike is roaring through the Seattle night with visions of some form of barely legal debauchery filling his tiny mind. Unknown to Nick, a wiz-kid mage has erected a barrier spell in Nick’s path. Blindly, and with an anticipatory grin on his face, Nick races straight into it.
What happens depends on exactly what type of barrier spell it was.
If the wiz-kid cast a straight mana barrier spell, Nick would have some problems. Not being living, the Aurora racing bike is unaffected by the mana barrier spell and roars on into the night. Whether Nick is still seated on it is another question entirely.
Nick hits the mana barrier as if he were hitting a wall. The speed at which he hits that wall is the speed at which his bike was traveling. Treat the barrier like an actual, physical wall with a Barrier Rating equal to the Force of the spell. When Nick hits the barrier, he may take damage.
The Power of the impact is equal to the speed of the vehicle in meters per Combat Turn, divided by 10 (round down). Thus, if Nick were traveling at the bike’s maximum of 210 meters per Combat Turn, the Power would be a nasty 21. If he were traveling at its cruising speed of 70 meters per Combat Turn, it would be a 7. (By the way, two bikes hitting head-on would add their individual speeds together to get the net speed of the impact.) The damage is calculated exactly as for Crash Tests, so consult that section to determine the Damage Code, which is also speed-based.
If this incident were to occur as part of the Combat Turn (say, as the result of an action by an imaginative magician), then the vehicle’s cruising speed would be used to find the Power.
Hitting this barrier, poor Nick would face the equivalent of a 21D attack. He can make a normal Damage Resistance Test. If he is aware of the impact, he may add dice from his Combat Pool. If Nick had been traveling at a more leisurely 70 meters per Combat Turn, the Damage Code would be 7S. Note that armor does not help Nick because this is a mana spell that ignores the armor.
See the Blast against Barriers section, p. 97, for handling damage against walls. Spells whose Barrier Rating (Force) drops to 0 are knocked down. If the spell is not knocked to 0, it automatically rebuilds itself during the casting magician’s next action.
If Nick had been traveling in an enclosed car, he and the vehicle would have blithely passed through the mana barrier spell, completely unaffected by it.
If the barrier spell were physical or a wall, the Aurora would also be in trouble. In fact, the bike would hit the barrier before Nick, and that impact would have to be resolved before dealing with the effect on Nick. All other values remain the same as for Nick, but the vehicle makes its Damage Resistance Test with its Body dice, plus one-half its vehicle armor, rounding down.
If the barrier breaks as a result of the impact (is reduced to 0), Nick must make a Crash Test, per p. 107. If the barrier does not break, Nick (or the passenger of any vehicle) suffers an attack of the same Power as the bike, but at one Damage Code Level less.
VEHICLE DAMAGE
Vehicles use a standard Condition Monitor marked off in Condition Levels of Light, Moderate, Serious, and Destroyed. Just as a regular character receives modification based on his damage status, so does a vehicle.
The table below indicates the effects of damage on vehicles.
The vehicle damage modifier applies to all tests that actually involve the vehicle.
The Initiative modifier reduces the effective Reaction of the character controlling the vehicle.
The Speed modifier reduces the vehicle’s cruising speed and maximum speed.
VEHICLE DAMAGE MODIFIERS






Vehicle Damage
Target Number
Initiative Modifier
Speed
Light
+1
-1
No change
Moderate
+2
-2
75%
Serious
+3
-3
50%

DAMAGE AND HEALING
As one might expect, Shadowrun characters can get hurt. What kind of damage, how bad an injury, and how much it affects the character varies greatly.
TYPES OF INJURY
Damage occurs as one of two types: Physical and Stun. The two types of damage are kept track of separately.
Physical Damage
Physical Damage is the most dangerous of the two. It is the kind of damage done by guns, explosions, bladed or sharp weapons, and most magic spells. If the Damage Code of a weapon does not indicate either Physical or Stun damage, the weapon does Physical damage. Weapons that do Stun damage always say so.
As one might expect, Physical damage takes the most time to heal.
Stun Damage
Stun damage is usually bruising damage, muscle fatigue, and the like, and is the kind done by fists, kicks, blunt weapons, stun rounds, shock weapons, concussion grenades, spellcasting fatigue, and as the effect of some magic spells. If something does Stun damage, its Damage Code will always say Stun.
Stun damage heals fairly quickly, but its immediate effects can be as deadly as Physical damage.
DAMAGE CODES
As discussed previously, all weapons have Damage Codes that indicate how difficult it is to avoid or resist the damage, and how serious are the actual wounds the weapon causes. For convenience, those rules are reviewed here, as well as expanded upon.
A weapon’s Damage Code consists of two parts, a numeral for the Power and a letter for the Damage Level. Damage Codes are always listed as: 4L, 10M, 6D, and so on.
Power
A weapon’s Power is the first part of the Damage Code. This number is used as the target for any Success Tests to avoid or resist the damage caused by the weapon. It is often modified by some resisting value, such as body armor.
If, for example, a character is hit by a weapon with a Power of 6, the target number for the character’s Success Tests to avoid or resist the damage would be 6, assuming the number was not modified by the presence of armor.
Damage Level
The second part of the Damage Code is the Damage Level. This letter code indicates the base severity of the damage done by the weapon. The four possible levels are “L” for Light, “M” for Moderate, “S” for Serious, and “D” for Deadly.
Everything else being equal, a character struck by a weapon with a given Damage Level (L, M, S, or D) will take a Light, Moderate, Serious, or Deadly wound, as appropriate. Usually, however, the Damage Level is increased or reduced in some manner before the damage is applied to the character. This process is known as staging.
The attacking character, using the successes generated from his Success Test, can stage the weapon up one Damage Level for every 2 successes generated. So, if he is using a weapon that has a base Damage Level of M and if he has generated 4 successes in his Success Test, the attacking character could stage the weapon’s damage to D (2 successes increase the Damage Level to S and 2 more increase it to D).
The target or defending character is trying to do just the opposite. The defender wants to stage the weapon damage down. The weapon’s Damage Code can be staged down one level for every 2 successes the defender generates. If, for example, the defender generated 4 successes against a weapon doing Serious damage, the damage would become Light (2 successes stage it down to M, and 2 more stage it to L).
The successes of the participants are usually compared, and the character with the higher net successes wins and stages the damage accordingly. See Resolving Ranged Combat, p. 87, and Resolving Melee Combat, p. 100, for information and procedures related to those types of combat.
If the weapon damage is staged below Light (the level is already at L and at least 2 more successes remain to be used for staging), then no damage is done. On the other end of the spectrum, deadly damage is the highest level of damage possible.
APPLYING DAMAGE
Once the damage has been staged, the character is subject to any damage that remains. This remaining damage is recorded on the character’s Condition Monitor. The Condition Monitor has two columns: Physical and Stun. Physical damage is recorded in the Physical column and Stun damage in the Stun column.
The number of boxes filled in on the monitor depends on the final, staged Damage Code of the weapon. Consulting the table below, one can see that a previously unharmed character taking either Physical or Stun damage would have 1 box filled in if the weapon did Light damage, 3 boxes if Moderate damage, 6 for Serious, and all 10 for Deadly.
Damage is cumulative, so a character who already has 3 boxes filled in (from a Moderate wound) and who takes another Moderate wound would then have a total of 6 boxes filled in, for the equivalent of a Serious wound. If the character had taken a Light wound, he would have 4 boxes filled in (3 + 1), and if he had taken a Serious, he would have a total of 9 boxes filled in.
DAMAGE LEVEL TABLE


Damage Type
Number of Boxes Filled In
Light
1
Moderate
3
Serious
6
Deadly
10

Exceeding the Condition Monitor
What happens when the total number of boxes filled in within a column (Physical or Stun) exceeds 10? If the damage is Stun, it then carries over into the Physical column. That is, a character who has already taken a Serious Stun wound (6 boxes) takes another Serious Stun hit. Serious does 6 boxes, so the last 4 boxes in the Stun column would be filled in, and the remaining 2 boxes would be filled in on the Physical column. If there was already damage in the Physical column, this damage is treated as if it were additional Physical damage and added to the existing damage. When the Stun column is exceeded, the character also falls unconscious. Consciousness is not regained until Stun damage is healed and the damage removed from the Stun column. See Healing, p. 112.
If the Physical column is exceeded, the character is in trouble. Overflowing the Physical column means the character is near death. Instant death occurs only if the Physical column is exceeded by more than the character’s natural Body Rating. If the character takes more damage than 10 plus his Body Rating, he or she is dead.
Characters who have exceeded their Physical column, but not by more than their Body Rating, can still survive if they receive prompt medical attention. If unattended, the character takes an additional box of damage every 10 minutes. If this exceeds the character’s Body Rating plus 10 before medical help arrives, the character is dead. See Deadly Wounds and First Aid, p. 115, for the rules governing medical aid to characters in that condition.
The Damage Modifiers Table shows what effect injury has on a character’s attempts to use skills and abilities and how it affects his Initiative total.
The Injury Modifier is a universal target number modifier that applies to nearly all Success Tests the injured character may attempt, except those involving attempts to resist damage or avoid damage.
The Initiative Modifier is applied to the character’s Reaction before Initiative dice have been rolled. If the Initiative Modifier reduces the Character’s Reaction to 0 or less, the character cannot take any actions that Combat Turn.
DAMAGE MODIFIERS TABLE




Damage Level
Injury Modifier
Initiative Modifier
Uninjured
None
None
Light
+1
-1
Moderate
+2
-2
Serious
+3
-3
Deadly
Unconscious or Near Death
—

HEALING
Healing takes time. The more injured a character is, the longer it takes. Stun and Physical damage heal differently, and at different rates.
Healing Stun Damage
Technically, overcoming Stun damage is more a process of recovery than healing because Stun is not actual, real, damage. How long Stun takes to recover is based on the amount of Stun damage taken, and the results of a Body or Willpower (whichever is higher) Test. To recover from Stun damage, roll either Body or Willpower dice against a base Target Number of 2. This target number is modified by any Injury modifiers, Stun or Physical, the character currently has.
Actual recovery of a box of Stun damage takes a base time of 60 minutes. The actual time it takes to recover 1 box of Stun damage is equal to the base time, divided by the number of successes generated. After this period has elapsed, the character has recovered 1 box of Stun damage, and the damage is erased from the Condition Monitor. A character who has been knocked unconscious from Deadly Stun will not wake up until his or her Stun damage is reduced to Serious. To recover from Stun damage, the character must be resting completely. If this resting time is interrupted, the recovery process aborts and the character will have to make the Body or Willpower Test again, using his current condition. The result can never be better than the result of the first roll, however.
Resting is the only way that Stun damage can be recovered. No medical treatment really helps, nor does any magical spell currently known to man. Stim patches provide a temporary solution, with definite long-term drawbacks. See Stimulant Patch, p. 250 of the Gear chapter.
Healing Physical Damage
Physical damage takes much longer to heal than Stun damage. Though Physical damage often heals without the benefit of medical attention, that is not always the case. When the adventure is over, or when a sufficiently long time-break occurs within the story, each wounded character makes a Body Test against a target number set by his or her overall wound level. Only the character’s natural Body Rating should be used; cyberware doesn’t help.

WOUND TABLE


Wound Level
Target Number
Light
2
Moderate
4
Serious
6

If the test yields any successes, the character heals without medical attention. If the test results in no successes, medical attention is required for healing to occur. Deadly wounds always require medical attention.
The effects of First Aid and Magical Healing (see p. 115) should be applied before making the test for medical attention.
Stages of Healing
Actual healing occurs in stages, with each one stage reducing the character’s damage by one level. After one stage of healing, Deadly would become Serious, Serious become Moderate, and so on. When one Damage Level is healed, the Condition Monitor drops to the lowest point for the next Damage Level. A character who has a Serious wound drops to having only 3 boxes filled in when his Condition Level is reduced to Moderate, no matter how many Serious damage boxes had been filled in.
Healing takes time, and it will also take money, if a doctor is involved. To determine how long it takes a character to heal one Damage Level, consult the Healing Table.
HEALING TABLE








Damage Level
Base Time
Min. Time
Target Number
Min. Lifestyle
Deadly
30 days
3 days
10
Hospitalized
Serious
20 days
2 days
8
High
Moderate
10 days
1 day
6
Middle
Light
24 hours
2 hours
4
Low

To determine how long healing actually takes, make a Body Test against the appropriate target number from the table. There are some modifiers. If a doctor is involved (one with a real medical degree, not just Biotech Skill), consult the Doctoring Table below. If the character is unable to support the Minimum Lifestyle required for healing, he suffers additional modifiers based on his condition (Gamemaster discretion). Lifestyle cost can be paid for daily. Simply divide the cost for the month by 30. See Lifestyles, p. 189, for more information.
Divide the successes from the Body Test into the base time to determine the actual healing time. Regardless of the results of the test or the quality of care, the actual time can never be lower than the Minimum Time listed on the table.
DOCTORING TABLE


Situation
Modifier
Intensive care (hospital only)
-2
Long-term magical care
-2
Conditions (only one applies)


Not in hospital or clinic
+2
Bad conditions
+2
Terrible conditions
+4
Patient is magician
+2
Patient’s natural Body Attribute is


1–3
+0
4–6
-1
7–9
-2
10 or more
-3
Patient’s natural Willpower Attribute is


1–3
+0
4–6
-1
7–9
-2
10 or more
-3

*Not including magical spell-based or cybernetic modifications.
Medical Costs
If there is a doctor involved, there is probably a bill to pay. Consult the Medical Costs Table immediately following to determine the fiscal damage.
MEDICAL COSTS TABLE


Service
Cost
Paramedic first aid for:


Deadly wound
400¥
Serious wound
200¥
Moderate wound
100¥
Light wound
50¥
Doctor’s services for:


Deadly wound
400¥ per day
Serious wound
200¥ per day
Moderate wound
100¥ per day
Light wound
50¥ per day
Hospitalization Lifestyle (Includes doctor’s services)
Per Lifestyle rules (p. 189)
Intensive Care (Deadly wounds only)
1,000¥ per day

Deadly Wounds and Permanent Damage
When a character suffers a Deadly wound, there is a chance of permanent damage to a vital organ, limb, or biological system. Make a Body Test (dermal armor counts) against a Target Number 4. If a trauma patch was used, apply a +2 modifier.
0 Successes: Bad luck. Some vital organ, body part, or system has been gravely damaged. The patient must be kept under continuous treatment by another character with Biotech Skill even if the wounded character has been stabilized. Double the time for the entire healing process. A replacement organ of one kind or another must be transplanted. This requires drastic invasive surgery and a replacement organ (see Pieces and Parts). Roll 1D6 for the actual damage result:
Die Roll
Result
1
Lose 1 point of Body
2
Lose 1 point of Strength
3
Lose 1 point of Quickness
4
Lose 1 point of Intelligence
5
Lose 1 point of Willpower
6
Lose 1 point of Reaction

The Attribute points lost in this manner cannot be recovered, though they can be replaced by cybernetic or other means. The loss of an Attribute point in this manner drops the character’s Racial Maximum for that Attribute by 1 point.
1 Success: A limb or eye has been mangled beyond its ability to heal. A replacement is required, either natural or cyber. This adds to the normal healing costs and may mean having to wait to get the replacement before healing can begin. Increase the base healing time by 50 percent. This requires major invasive surgery and a replacement eye or limb (see Pieces and Parts). Roll 1D6 for the actual damage result:
Die Roll
Result
1
Lose right arm
2
Lose left arm
3
Lose right leg
4
Lose left leg
5
Lose an ear (Roll 1D6: 1–3 right ear, 4–6 left)
6
Lose an eye (Roll 1D6: 1–3 right eye, 4–6 left)

2 or More Successes: The character takes no limb or organ damage.
Pieces and Parts
When a character loses a body part and needs a replacement, the part might not be immediately available. Those who want a complete DNA match will have to have the part grown. (Of course, a DocWagon™ platinum service contract includes a “donor counterpart” that can provide material for immediate transplant starting three months into the contract.)
Transplants have varying degrees of compatibility with the recipient. Over time or when subjected to severe stress (like more Deadly damage), the transplant may fail, requiring another replacement. The Gamemaster decides when to invoke the possibility of failure, so be nice and kiss up often.
BODY PART TYPES




Body Part
Base Time to Grow
Cost
Eye or Small Organ
3 weeks
7,500¥
Large Organ
5 weeks
15,000¥
Hand/Foot
6 weeks
15,000¥
Limb
8 weeks
25,000¥

In addition to the type of replacement, a variety of different grades exist, at varying availability, compatibility, and costs. The best is clonal (a precise duplicate of the character’s own part), while the worst is secondhand (somebody else’s part; don’t ask).
BODY PART GRADES






Grade
Availability
Compatibility
Cost
Clonal
Must grow
100%
Base × 2
Type O
3 in 6
90%
Base
Type G
5 in 6
75%
Base × 0.8
Secondhand
Always
30–65% (3D6 × 5%)
Base × 0.4
Compatibility
Chance of Failure Under Stress




100%
No chance




90–99%
3 or less on 2D6




70–89%
4 or less on 2D6




40–69%
5 or less on 2D6




10–39%
6 or less on 2D6





Clonal parts that must be grown can be force-grown through a special process. To determine the actual time, divide the Force Growth Rating (a player-chosen maximum of 10) into the part’s base time to grow. Forced Growth increases the part cost and rating, however, and reduces the compatibility by the rating in percentage.
Cyber Replacements
Cyberware can be installed to replace the damaged or lost body part. See the rules for Elective Surgery, for implanting cyberware.
ELECTIVE SURGERY
Surgery does damage. Medical technology will not let a patient die on the table, but one cannot just bop into a clinic, get a full dermal armor implant, and then jog out the next day to kick butt. Recovery takes a while.
Minor cosmetic surgery gives a character a Light wound. This covers anything that does not cost Essence, and consists of minor plastic surgery not involving the eyes, muscles, or nervous system. Examples are a nose job or an ear-bobbing.
Minor invasive surgery gives a character a Moderate wound. Minor surgery includes anything costing up to 0.4 points of Essence, or any cosmetic surgery involving the whole body, eyes, muscles, or nervous system. Getting a crest that can be raised or lowered (nerve connections required) or a whole-body skin graft would come under this category.
Major invasive surgery gives a character a Serious wound. Any procedure costing 0.41 to 0.99 points of Essence is major. This category also includes any organic limb replacements or eye transplants. New eyes are blind until fully healed from this surgery.
Drastic invasive surgery leaves a character with a Deadly wound, but the condition is stable and the character will not die. Drastic surgery is any procedure costing 1 or more points of Essence. This category also includes any organ transplants. Magicians are required to check for Magic loss after healing (see p. 115).
Calculate the Essence costs of all the cyberware the character is having installed at the same time. (The character cannot have additional cyberware installed until all healing is complete, so he may as well do it all at once.) Surgery costs do not include the cost of recovery!
FIRST AID
For the times when a wound cannot wait for professional medical assistance, the Biotech Skill is used for first aid. It can reduce wounds that are not Deadly, or stabilize Deadly wounds until the character can be taken to a doctor. Biotech only helps Physical damage, not Stun. Stun can only be recovered by resting.
In order to be effective, first aid must be applied during the “golden” first hour following an injury. Regardless of the success, first aid is no longer of any use once magical healing has been applied.
To apply first aid, make a Biotech Success Test against a target number that corresponds to the injured character’s current Damage Level from the First Aid Table. Then apply the target number modifiers that follow.
FIRST AID TABLE




Condition Level
Target Number
Treatment Time
Light
4
10 minutes
Moderate
6
20 minutes
Serious
8
30 minutes
Deadly
10
Special


TARGET NUMBER MODIFIERS


Situation
Modifier
Patient is a magician
+2
Bad conditions
+1
Terrible conditions
+3
Patient’s Body Attribute


1–3
+0
4–6
-1
7–9
-2
10 or more
-3
No medkit available
+4

If the test results in at least 1 success, the Damage Level is reduced by one level. The Damage Level can never be reduced by more than one level through first aid. To determine how long the first aid treatment takes, divide the Biotech successes into the treatment time. The result is the number of uninterrupted minutes the treatment takes. Any serious interruption aborts the first aid process, but it can be repeated.
Deadly Wounds and First Aid
Special rules come into play when using first aid on a character with a Deadly wound. Because the character is suffering terrible wounds, first aid can only stabilize; it cannot heal. Even then, there is the chance that the character will die while being treated.
A Biotech Test is necessary, just as for regular first aid. If the test produces at least 1 success, the character stabilizes and stops taking an additional box of damage every 10 minutes, as indicated in Exceeding the Condition Monitor, p. 111. Should the test fail, make a natural Body Test for the wounded character against a Target Number 10. If the test succeeds, the character’s body stabilizes itself. If both tests fail, the character will die once his or her Body Rating has been exceeded. Again, see Exceeding the Condition Monitor.
Professional help, once it reaches the character, allows another Biotech Test and character Body Test. In this case, professional help is defined as a source of medical attention better equipped (such as a hospital or clinic) or with a better Biotech Skill Rating (such as a DocWagon™ paramedic) than that offered by the character who initially administered the first aid.
Trauma Patches
A last-ditch alternative is available to stabilize characters in danger of imminent death. The trauma patch is an adhesive patch that is placed against the patient’s skin directly over the heart. The patch administers measured, controlled doses of high-powered medicines designed to stabilize an injured body. When a trauma patch is applied, the character is allowed an additional natural Body Test to stabilize. The Target Number for this test is 4, plus the rating of any dermal armor or blood filters present (both restrict the flow of medicine). Success leaves the character stable, and stops the accumulation of additional damage boxes.
The trauma patch is used only as a last resort, because it could have lasting ill-effects on the patient. See the section Deadly Wounds and Permanent Damage, p. 114.
MAGICIANS AND DAMAGE
Magicians have it rough when they get hurt. Doctors and medics have a harder time treating them because they cannot use their high-tech gear and high-powered medicines on the patient without risking damage to the character’s Magic Rating. A magician can be treated without the +2 modifier (see First Aid Table), but then a test has to be made for Magic loss.
When a magician suffers a Deadly wound, or is treated without the +2 modifier, there is a risk of a loss of Magic. Roll 2D6. If the result is less than or equal to the magician’s current Magic Rating, 1 point is lost permanently. If the magician is being treated for a Deadly wound and the +2 modifier is not observed, check twice for Magic loss.
If a magician requires a replacement limb or organ, it must be cloned from the original tissue. Any other DNA pattern, even that of another magician, will reduce the character’s Power-handling capability and automatically reduce the character’s Magic Rating by 1. This can be temporary, in that a non-cyber substitute can be replaced later with a limb or organ cloned from the magician’s tissue. This restores the lost points of Magic Rating, but organ implants do Deadly surgical damage, and consequently pose the risk of even greater Magic loss.
Magical Healing
The Treat spell must be applied within one hour of the injury to be of any effect. The Heal spell can be administered at any time.
Successful use of either spell precludes the use of additional healing or treating spells, or of first aid.
Treat and Heal spells will reduce Physical overflow damage.
MAGIC
Magic is not tuxedos, white rabbits, and fake flowers anymore. It is power. —Arthur Garrett, Chairman, Department of Occult Studies, UCLA
There are few who would have the temerity to argue that any single event in the known history of Earth is more significant than the return of magic. The world woke up one morning and suddenly all the rules were different. The boundaries of existence had changed and life had to be relearned. The world had Awakened.
In Shadowrun, characters can choose to walk one of three magical paths: that of shamanism, of the hermetic tradition, or the path of physical discipline. Whichever path the character chooses, it is for life. There is no going back.
A character who chooses the shamanic tradition becomes a shaman. Shamans receive their power through linking their own inner world of emotion, will, and faith with the external world of nature. This link with nature is personified through a totem, an animal figure that exemplifies the shaman’s beliefs and way of life.
A character who chooses the hermetic tradition becomes a mage. A mage sees the universe as a pattern of abstract forces and energies that can be controlled through complex symbols and formulae of power. Where shamanism is intuitive and improvisational, hermetic magic is more intellectual in its approach, relying on observation, theory, practices, and precise execution. Mages are scholars and often have elaborate libraries and equipment to assist their research and practice.
A character who walks the path of physical discipline becomes a physical adept. A physical adept is concerned with mastery and perfection of the physical body in order to achieve a state of inner harmony. A physical adept can do little that does not directly involve the body, but that is usually enough.
In Shadowrun, any character with a Magic Rating is generically considered to be a magician. The title of magician signifies magical ability on some level, regardless of whether it be hermetic or shamanic. Often, the rules simply refer to magicians, encompassing both forms equally. When the rules are referring exclusively to the hermetic tradition, however, the term mage is used. If the rules speak only of the shamanic tradition, the term shaman is used. Rules for physical adepts are almost unique and overlap little with the rules for hermetic or shamanic magicians.
The path of magic that the character chooses affects how easily he can learn spells and what kinds of spirits he can summon. It may also impose requirements on how the character acts. Indeed, the choice colors the character’s whole outlook on life, his relationships with other characters, and his motives for studying magic.
Magicians, regardless of tradition or form, come in two basic types. There is the full-blooded magician, who can tap into the full range of abilities of the chosen tradition, and the adept, who can only practice certain types and forms of magic within strict limitations. There are two ways to be considered a full-blooded magician: the character must either have been human during Character Creation, at which time his or her Priority A choice was allocated to Magic, or else the character would have had to be a metahuman whose Priority B choice was allocated to Magic.
To be an adept, a character must have been either human and had his Priority B choice allocated to Magic, or else been metahuman and had his Priority C choice allocated to Magic. See Adepts, pp. 124–26, and Creating A Character, pp. 40–48, for more information.
THE SHAMANIC TRADITION
A shaman’s magic comes from the world of nature and the power of emotions. In days past, some “civilized” scholars disparaged shamanism, calling it “primitive” nature worship. When the Awakening came, however, these “backward” primitives knew how to use their new power to pay back the governments and corporations that had oppressed their people for so long. Indeed, shamanism had developed even among some city-dwellers during the boom in occultism at the close of the 20th century. When the magic came back, these “urban shamans” found that the old ways worked well in cities, too.
To a shaman, the universe is alive. Animals, plants, stones, Mother Earth herself, are all potential allies who can be contacted magically. Before the Awakening, a shaman could only do this by use of hallucinogens, hours of chanting and dancing to the hypnotic beat of drums, or even self-inflicted torture. Though the shamans of the 2050-era still use chants and dance, usually only a few words or motions are all it takes to make the magic happen.
Shamans are in tune with the ways of nature and life. They are concerned with the maintenance and preservation of their environment, be it the wilds of the Pacific Northwest, the expanse of the Sahara, the majesty of the Amazon rain forests, or the wonderfully complex ecosystem that is a modern city. All is nature, whether it be rocks, streams, trees, and animals, or concrete, steel, neon, and humanity.
TOTEMS
To be a shaman, one must have a totem. To the shaman, the totem is an ideal to be emulated. Coyote, for example, has his ways, as does Bear. Both are animal images representing an outlook and a way of life. The shaman lives by these ideals, and the totem provides him with a pattern for his life. The totem represents the shaman’s perfect self. While in the imperfect form of his mortal flesh, the shaman must do all that he can to live the way of the totem.
An example of how strong are the ties between shaman and totem is the time-honored tradition of the shamanic mask. Before the Awakening, shamans wore masks that evoked their totem. Made from primitive materials, these masks were crude or sophisticated, simple or elaborate, depending on the shaman’s culture. The shamanic mask was an item of great power. When wearing the mask, the shaman became the totem incarnate. The dividing line between crude flesh and perfect form was bridged, and the shaman and totem were one.
Physical masks are no longer necessary. When a shaman performs magic, the physical traits associated with the totem become more apparent in him. The more powerful the magic, the more noticeable these animal traits become. A complete shapechange does not occur, but the effect can be striking nonetheless.
If, for example, an Eagle shaman were to perform a minor spell, one not particularly relevant to the Eagle totem, the shaman’s features might merely take on a sharper cast, or her chant come to resemble the shrill cry of a mighty bird. When casting a more demanding spell, the same shaman’s crooked fingers would become like the talons of an eagle and his or her eyes like the piercing eyes of a hunting bird. When calling on a powerful spell, the shaman’s own features can completely dissolve within the image of a mighty eagle’s head.
Even without the shamanic mask, the life, dress, and actions of the shaman evoke the totem. Unlike a hermetic mage, a shaman cannot even temporarily cast aside the accouterments of the chosen way without risking the totem’s anger. The totem is the way of life. Life is the way of the totem.
Choosing a Totem
Technically, it is the totem that does the choosing. Sometime early in life, though occasionally later, the would-be shaman feels the call of the totem. Often it will be an event or incident that symbolizes this call and begins the relationship of the shaman and the totem. Though it may take some time for the individual to find the path, the totem is always there waiting for the shaman to walk it.
In Shadowrun, players are allowed to choose their characters’ totems at the time of character creation. This choice is always permanent. Remember, it is the totem that chooses, and though it may not seem so, the totem always chooses right.
The totem must be one of the wilderness or urban totems. Wilderness totems are animals that live in the wild, such as Eagle, Wolf, Bear, and so on. Urban totems are animals that have found some niche in the urban ecology: Rat, Raccoon, Dog, and others.
There are hundreds of possible totem animals, but space here to describe only a few. Players who wish to create an alternate totem can work with their Gamemaster to define its characteristics, advantages, and disadvantages.
The choice of totem places some restrictions on the shaman’s use of magic and behavior. It also bestows various advantages and disadvantages. A shaman has extra dice in his Magic Pool when casting spells that fall within the power of the totem. Then again, some totems cost the shaman dice from the Magic Pool when he is casting spells outside the totem’s power. These dice advantages or disadvantages are called totem modifiers. Shamans also get totem modifiers for using Conjuring Skill to summon or banish certain kinds of nature spirits.
It is best to view the totem modifiers as bonus or penalty dice that apply in certain situations. For example, Flys Like Wind, a Raven shaman, receives 2 extra dice for manipulation spells, but loses 1 die for combat spells. When it comes time to cast one of those spells, the shaman has 2 additional dice in the Magic Pool for a manipulation spell, or 1 less if it is a combat spell, at the moment the spell is cast. These dice exist, or are removed, only at the exact moment the spell is cast. If the Magic Pool would normally be used up, but the totem modifier adds 2 dice, then there are 2 extra dice available for casting the appropriate spell at that moment. If there are dice in the pool, but the totem modifier reduces the pool to 0, then no extra dice are available for casting that specific, but ill-favored, spell.
The player should choose a totem that is easy to roleplay. A Bear shaman, for example, would be deliberate, ponderous, and with a clumsy shamble that looks slow until he has to move fast. A Rat shaman might be unwashed and fond of dark corners, always keeping an eye out for an emergency exit. When she has to fight, Rat will fight like a cornered…well, rat.
Players should also note that a totem is not just a “bear” or even “the bear.” The totem is Bear, the archetype for all bears in the world. A totem is not just an animal, but the essence, or true spirit, of that animal. Gender-specific pronouns are sometimes used when describing a totem, but these are intended only to bring a certain tone to the descriptions and do not indicate any gender restriction for shamans of that totem.
TOTEM TABLE
Wilderness
Bear
Coyote
Eagle
Gator
Lion
Owl
Raccoon
Raven
Shark
Snake
Wolf
Urban
Cat
Coyote
Dog
Gator
Owl
Raccoon
Rat
Snake
Bear
Characteristics: Bear is powerful in body, but ponderous unless he has to move fast. He seems clumsy and unaware of his surroundings, but he is in harmony with the world and what goes on around him. He is slow in speech but mighty in battle. Bear is a powerful healing totem found in shamanic cultures wherever bears are known, be it North America, central and northern Europe, or Asia.
Bear is a healer. Unless a Bear shaman has a good reason to refuse healing to someone who needs it, he cannot do so.
Favored Environment: Forest
Advantages: +2 dice for all health spells; +2 dice for conjuring forest spirits.
Disadvantages: A Bear shaman can go berserk when wounded. Whenever a Bear shaman is wounded, his player makes a Willpower Test with an injury-modified Target Number of 3. The Bear shaman will go berserk for three Turns, minus one Turn for every success. If the player rolls 3 or more successes, the berserk rage is controlled. A berserk shaman will attack the closest living thing, using his most powerful weapons (either magical or physical). When the time is up or if the shaman kills or incapacitates an enemy, the berserk fury dissipates.
Cat
Characteristics: Cat is stealthy, vain, cunning, and sometimes cruel. Cat loves to ferret out secrets, but dislikes sharing them with others, for she is Cat-Who-Walks-Alone. Cat is an urban totem, at home with mankind, either in their company or as a lonely hunter in city streets and alleyways. Cat shamans are solitary types, committed to no one but themselves.
Favored Environment: Urban
Advantages: +2 dice for illusion spells; +2 dice for conjuring city spirits.
Disadvantages: Cat will toy with an opponent in battle, even when the situation is desperate. She will threaten, sneer, and hiss, displaying her dominance. She will also use showy magic, flashy physical combat, or other irrelevancies in the process of the kill. An unwounded Cat shaman must make a Willpower Test with a Target Number 6 when she wants to cast a combat spell. If the test fails, she casts the least damaging of the spells she knows. If the shaman is wounded, all this playing around stops. Cat is so fastidiously clean that she suffers a +1 target modifier to all her tests whenever dirty or unkempt.
Coyote
Characteristics: Coyote is the Great Trickster, unpredictably bold one moment, cowardly the next. He can be a friend or a cruel joker who leads one into danger. Coyote is also the great magician. A Coyote shaman is too independent to be bound by anything except his word. Like Grandfather Coyote of the legends, he is intensely curious. He is also typically greedy and fond of taking risks just for fun.
Favored Environment: Anywhere on land
Advantages/Disadvantages: None. A Coyote shaman would never permit himself to be limited by such concepts. He is beyond rules and lives by his own wits.
Dog
Characteristics: Dog is loyal to friends and family. He fights furiously to defend his home and holdings, but is not generally aggressive outside his own territory. Dog loves people, and will defend them pitilessly from dangerous spirits or evil magic. Once a Dog shaman gives his loyalty or love, he will remain loyal even if the person he loves is unworthy. A Dog shaman will try to protect humanity from evil magicians at any cost.
Favored Environment: Urban
Advantages: +2 dice for detection spells; +2 dice for conjuring field and hearth spirits.
Disadvantages: Dog is single-minded, to the point of stubbornness. Any time a Dog shaman changes his plans or tactics, his player must make a Willpower Test with a Target Number 4. The test itself requires one Complex Action as Dog struggles to change his mind.
Eagle
Characteristics: Eagle is the highest-flying bird in the sky, and so comes closest to heaven. He faces the rising sun at dawn and is lord of the highest peaks. Eagle is proud, solitary, and sees everything that happens on the Earth over which he flies.
Favored Environment: Mountains
Advantages: +2 dice for detection spells; +2 dice for conjuring wind spirits.
Disadvantages: An Eagle shaman will not tolerate evil or ignoble actions. He is a fierce defender of the land and the purity of nature, with a strong distrust of technology and its tools. Polluters and others who would damage the land for profit are Eagle’s enemies, and he will brave any danger to defeat them. Double all Essence losses caused by adding cyberware, because of the psychological impact this has on the Eagle shaman.
Gator
Characteristics: Gator is a great fighter and a big eater. He is swift to act when action is called for, but lethargic, even torpid, the rest of the time. Gator is often ill-tempered, especially when prodded to action. But once he grips, he holds, and will not turn away from a path he has chosen.
Favored Environment: Swamps or rivers in the wilderness. Gator is also an urban totem because myth, if not reality, has placed him in the sewers of the great cities. In magic, myth is as good as reality and so Gator thrives among urban shamans.
Advantages: +2 dice for combat and detection spells; +2 dice for conjuring spirits of the swamp, lake, or river (if a wilderness totem chosen), or city spirits (if an urban totem chosen).
Disadvantages: Gator is lazy and greedy. As an eater, he prefers to glut himself with food and then laze around. As a shadowrunner, he prefers a job with a big payoff that will let him take it easy until all the money is gone. It can take some hefty argument to make Gator exert himself. His greed makes him loathe to share material goods, and he will almost never make loans or pick up a check. Once on a job, he goes for the direct solution and is impatient of subtlety. To make a Gator shaman break off a fight, a chase, or other direct action takes a Willpower Test with a Target Number 6. He also subtracts 1 die for illusion spells.
Lion
Characteristics: Lion is the brave and powerful warrior. His method is direct and pointed, for he is not a creature of subtlety. Lion prefers to work from surprise or ambush, allowing others to perform tasks for him while he holds his strength in reserve. He will take the offensive when necessary. Any threat to his kin or family is a threat to him.
Favored Environment: Prairie
Advantages: +2 dice for combat spells; +2 dice for conjuring prairie spirits.
Disadvantages: -1 die for health spells. Lion is vain and demands the most from himself, especially when it comes to his physical condition and appearance. He must live well, and demands respect and loyalty from those around him.
Owl
Characteristics: Owl is a wise and silent watcher. She rarely speaks, but she sees much. Owl rules the night skies, and so what she hunts, she finds. Owl is friendly to her companions, but terrible to her enemies. By day, she is practically helpless.
Favored Environment: Any urban or wilderness location, but spell-learning is conducted by night
Advantages: +2 dice for any sorcery or conjuring by night.
Disadvantages: +2 to all target numbers (even non-magical ones) when in direct sunlight. Even when Owl is sheltered from the sun, add +2 to all target numbers for magic during the daytime.
Raccoon
Characteristics: Raccoon is a clever bandit who can break open any trap to remove the bait. He can also escape any danger, for his paws are like cunning hands. Raccoon fights when he must, but prefers strategy and trickery.
Favored Environment: Anywhere but the desert
Advantages: +2 dice for manipulation spells; +2 dice for conjuring city spirits.
Disadvantages: A Raccoon shaman is a loner. Like Coyote, his intense curiosity makes him ignore danger in any quest for information. Raccoon can be greedy (this is a thief totem), but Raccoon shamans will steal only the very best, for petty thefts and violent robberies are beneath their dignity. Raccoon shamans suffer a -1 die modifier for combat spells.
Rat
Characteristics: Rat is a stealthy thief who is too selfish to share anything, even with his companions. He is also a reluctant warrior who would rather run than fight. Where mankind goes, there also goes Rat, for who else’s bounty can sustain him?
Favored Environment: Urban
Advantages: +2 dice for detection and illusion spells; +2 dice for conjuring all Spirits of Man.
Disadvantages: Rat shamans are usually dirty and unkempt. Rat is a coward, but when he must fight, he fights to kill. Rat dislikes working out in the open, for a muttered spell from the shadows (or a silenced pistol from a doorway) is more his style. Subtract 1 die for combat spells.
Raven
Characteristics: Like Coyote, Raven is a trickster, clever and devious. Raven is also the transformer, responsible for changes. He is a living contradiction, greedy and generous by turns.
Favored Environment: Anywhere under the open sky
Advantages: +2 dice for manipulation spells; +2 dice for conjuring wind spirits.
Disadvantages: Raven shamans are either overweight or else rail-thin. In either case, they are gluttonous and always hungry, finding it next to impossible to refuse an offer of food. Raven dislikes fighting, preferring to let others handle that part of life. Subtract 1 die for combat spells. Whenever not under the open sky, Raven shamans suffer a +1 to all target numbers.
Shark
Characteristics: Shark is a cold, relentless hunter, who is savage in combat. With no fixed home, he knows all the secrets of the sea. Shark can be a totem of shamans from any sea- or shore-dwelling culture, including the Hawaiian kahunas, the Japanese miko, Haitian houngans, Eskimo angekok, as well as the Native Americans of the Pacific Northwest and any surviving shamans among the few Australian aborigines still living in Dreamtime.
Favored Environment: On or by the sea
Advantages: +2 dice for combat and detection spells; +2 dice for conjuring sea spirits.
Disadvantages: A Shark shaman may go berserk when wounded in combat or if he kills an opponent. Whenever one of these conditions occurs, the shaman’s player must make a Willpower Test, with an injury-modified Target Number 4. He will go berserk for 3 Turns, minus 1 Turn for every success. If he scores 3 or more successes, he won’t go off. A berserk shaman will attack the closest living thing, using his most powerful weapons (either magical or physical). A berserk Shark shaman fights to kill. He may, alternatively, continue to hurl magic or use weapons against the inert body of his last victim, savagely blasting or hacking it. Even if he is not berserk, Shark believes that the only good enemy is a dead enemy. If challenged, he does not waste time with threats or bragging, but strikes, usually to kill.
Snake
Characteristics: Snake is a wise healer who dwells in many places and knows many secrets. Snake is a good counselor, but exacts a price for her advice. Snake is adaptable, and can confuse the senses of enemies.
Favored Environment: Anywhere except mountains
Advantages: +2 dice for healing, illusion, and detection spells. As a wilderness totem, +2 dice for conjuring any one Spirit of the Land (shaman’s choice). As an urban totem, +2 dice for conjuring any one Spirit of Man (shaman’s choice).
Disadvantages: Snake will not fight unless she must defend herself or else hunt to eat. Snake shamans have a -1 die modifier for any spells cast during combat. Snake shamans are obsessed with learning secrets and will take enormous risks to do so.
Wolf
Characteristics: Wolf is the hunter and warrior. He is brother to all his pack, and fiercely loyal to his mate and cubs. As the ancient saying goes, Wolf wins every fight but the last, and in that one, he dies.
Favored Environment: Forest, prairie, or mountain
Advantages: +2 dice for detection and combat spells; +2 dice for conjuring forest or prairie spirits (shaman’s choice).
Disadvantages: A Wolf shaman is loyal to his friends and family until death. Nothing can make him betray those bonds. Nor will he ever show cowardice. When a Wolf shaman extends his protection to another or otherwise accepts a responsibility, nothing can make him betray that bond. Wolf can, however, go berserk as a Bear does.
Insect Totems
Insects do not appear in this list of totems because they are rare in the shamanic tradition. When they do show up, however, it is often as a dangerous or evil influence. Veteran Shadowrun players already know that dark truth.
ROLEPLAYING THE SHAMAN
When roleplaying a shaman, the player must take care to behave appropriately for his or her totem. Otherwise, the shaman could lose his link to the totem, possibly even losing all access to its magic. A player who is not certain he wishes to limit his character with a lot of requirements should try playing a Coyote shaman, who has more freedom of action.
This does not mean that a Cat shaman never has close friends, or that a Shark shaman must kill anyone who looks at him sideways, but Cat will not reveal her darkest secrets, or even her telecom code, to every chummer she meets. Neither is Shark going to walk away from a fight just because someone might get hurt.
Shamans are human and a totem is not a religion, though it gets close. There are no commandments the shaman must follow. The totem is important because it is what makes the shaman a magician. Gamemasters should be lenient about occasional minor goofs.
If a shaman consistently behaves out of character for the totem, then the Gamemaster should punish the character. At first, punishment will be the loss of any advantages usually gained from the totem. For really persistent behavior, the Gamemaster can reduce the shaman’s Magic Attribute by 1 point.
A shaman can retrieve lost powers once he begins to behave properly again. A special shadowrun that is particularly appropriate to the totem might be required as a final purification, however.
THE MEDICINE LODGE
The medicine lodge is the sacred place of the shaman. It is a little, isolated world where powerful magics can be worked and it is a place for communication with the spirits. Here is where the shaman keeps the special items that are actually and symbolically powerful for him. It is the place where the world of the shaman bridges the worlds of the magical and the mundane.
The medicine lodge must be in an environment suitable to the shaman’s totem. A Bear lodge should be in the woods, for example, while a Rat lodge could be anywhere in a city. The lodge can be indoors, in a cave, or even an open campsite, as long as it has definite, marked-off boundaries. The lodge should be at least a 3-meter by 3-meter area; bigger if a group of shamans intend to share it.
A medicine lodge has a rating. The lodge’s rating is determined by the shaman’s ability and available time and money. To learn a spell, a shaman must have a medicine lodge available and it must have a rating at least equal to the Force of the spell he wishes to learn. See Learning A New Spell, p. 132.
Most tribes have permanent lodges, be it a hogan, teepee, kiva, cave, or pueblo designated as a lodge. Because many shamans stay on the move, they must often lug their lodges around with them. The actual materials would be animal pelts, bones, drums, painted hides, sands for sand paintings, minerals and crystals, and so on. All these are reusable, and need not be replaced after purchase unless the lodge is lost or destroyed. Talismongers sell the magical gear that goes into a medicine lodge. Generally speaking, a medicine lodge’s materials cost 500¥ per rating point and weigh about 2 kilograms per rating point.
It is best to set up a permanent medicine lodge. If that is not possible, the shaman should haul the materials to an appropriate site and set one up. It takes one day per rating point of the lodge to do this because the shaman must charge the new lodge with magical energy to link it to the Earth. It is for this reason that a permanent lodge is more convenient.
Lodges are erected to a specific totem and can be shared among shamans of that totem.
NATURE SPIRITS
One of the most powerful abilities of the shaman is the ability to conjure nature spirits. These are strong spirits associated with a specific place or domain, and that personify the forces or nature of that place. They can only be summoned by shamans. See Summoning Nature Spirits, p. 139, for more information.
SHAMAN ABILITIES
Shamans can use magical foci (pp. 137–39), cast Spells (pp. 129–32), and access Astral Space (pp. 145–50) without restriction. They may also use Conjuring (pp. 139–44), with some restriction on the types of spirits they may summon.
THE HERMETIC TRADITION
Though some magicians may like the country life, most are urban types. Their magic is based on a complicated set of theories that describe the way astral space contracts and intersects with the physical world. As one might expect, there are as many versions of these theories as there are mages.
Hermetic magic attracted much interest before the Awakening. Surprisingly large numbers from all walks of life were studying the disciplines of the mage at the time of the Awakening, reacting variously with surprise, relief, or dismay to discover that the magic suddenly worked. Because many of these students were corporate employees studying magic in their spare time, the corporations picked up on hermetic magic very early on. To this day the corporations employ wage mages in all capacities, but there are very few shamans. (Try telling Coyote he can only have an hour for lunch.)
Mages see the universe as a complex of abstract forces ranging from the simple and complex laws of natural physics to the equally simple and complex laws of metaphysics. How these forces work with and against each other, and how these forces can be controlled, is the territory of the hermetic mage.
Before the Awakening the process by which a mage opened up to those forces, and thereby controlled them, required lengthy, complex ceremonies. Now, a mage can work magic with a few gestures and key syllables of invocation. The elaborate rituals and equipment are necessary only for special situations.
The desire of the mage is to know, firsthand, the inner reality of the universe. The mage may practice magic for its own sake, or for the Nuyen it earns, or for power, but a mage is a scholar whose art demands constant study.
HERMETIC LIBRARIES
Mages spend a lot of time doing research. They need extensive reference libraries for many activities: learning new spells, designing magical rites, summoning spirits, and so on.
Hermetic libraries are specific to a given skill. That is, a mage needs separate libraries for sorcery, conjuring, and magical theory. Libraries, unlike the skills themselves, do not have Concentrations or Specializations. They do, however, have ratings reflecting their completeness and level of information.
A mage needs a sorcery library in order to increase his Sorcery Skill. Without it, skill advancement is very difficult (see Skills, p. 190). A conjuring library is vital in the summoning of elementals (see Conjuring, p. 139). A magical theory library is required to learn new spells (see Learning A New Spell, p. 132).
In the 2050s, print is almost dead, but many mages are old-fashioned enough to enjoy the feel of a physical book. Libraries can consist of printed books and papers (hardcopy). Though bulky, books are accessible almost anywhere and not subject to power failures. Alternatively, a library, like any other information, can be stored on a mini-CD (compact disk) or optical chip. The space required to store them is small, but the mage needs a data reader or computer to access them. Datasoft libraries (see Skillsofts, p. 248) are available, but they are expensive and not easily shared with other mages. A library can mix all three types of storage.
Mages can share libraries. Access to the thaumaturgical section of any big university library or corporate reference department lets any number of mages pursue projects at the same time. These large research facilities have nearly any rating a mage may require, within reason. Libraries above Rating 4 are difficult to find and acquire access to. Libraries often charge legitimate, registered users a fee on an hourly basis equal to the rating of the library in Nuyen. Illegal users may find the owners taking exception to their using the data.
Libraries can hold an amount of data equal to their rating, squared, times 100 Mp (megapulses). A Rating 6 sorcery, conjuring, or magical theory library would, for example, require 3,600 Mp, or 3.6 Gp (gigapulses).
Hardcopy libraries require roughly one-half cubic meter of space per 100 Mp of data. They also cost their rating points, squared, times 2,000¥. So again, that Rating 6 library would cost 72,000¥.
Electronic data merely requires sufficient CD or chip storage space. A magical library on CD holds 100 Mp per disk and costs its rating points, squared, times 1,000¥. Data-storage optical chips hold up to 1 Gp per chip and cost its rating points, squared, times 1,200¥. On disk, the Rating 6 library would take up 36 disks and cost 36,000¥. On chip, it would take up four chips and cost 43,200¥.
Library ratings are not cumulative. Combining a Rating 2 library with a Rating 3 library does not result in a Rating 5 library. It is still only a Rating 2 or 3 library.
THE HERMETIC CIRCLE
Sometimes a mage needs to set up a hermetic circle. It can be in any convenient, private place, indoors or out, but should be secluded so that operations will not attract gawkers.
Hermetic circles are prepared for a specific spell or conjuring. For example, if the mage wants to use ritual sorcery to cast a stink spell on someone, he must prepare a circle for that specific spell. He could not use the same circle to cast a mask spell the next day, but must draw a new one. The same goes for summoning elementals. A circle created to summon a fire elemental is useless for summoning water elementals (not to mention downright insulting to the elemental).
Once the circle has been drawn, it can be re-used for the same mystical operation. It is quite common for a mage to draw a circle for summoning a fire elemental, leaving it in place for another day and another summoning.
Hermetic circles have ratings. There is no limit to the rating of a circle a mage can create, as long as he has sufficient time and enough room. Actually drawing and empowering the circle takes a number of hours of uninterrupted work equal to the circle’s rating. The circle is a base 3 meters in diameter, plus an additional number of meters equal to the rating. That means a Rating 6 Hermetic Circle would be 9 meters in diameter.
A circle’s rating limits the maximum rating of an operation conducted within it. For example, summoning an elemental with a Force 6 requires a hermetic circle with at least a Rating 6.
A hermetic circle is linked to the mage who inscribed it. This link can be traced through astral space, though with some difficulty (see Astral Tracking, p. 149). Also, like spell constructs, the style of a circle’s creator is identifiable within its construction. See Astral Perception, p. 145, for more information.
ADEPTS
A less powerful form of magician, an adept is focused and restricted in his abilities. Like full magicians, adepts have a Magic Rating and lose points from that Attribute as they suffer Essence loss or Deadly wounds. There are three types of adepts: magical adepts, shamanic adepts, and physical adepts.
MAGICAL ADEPTS
A magical adept can use only one magical skill. An adept who uses only Sorcery Skill is often referred to as a sorcerer, while one who uses only Conjuring Skill is referred to as a conjurer. Sorcerers are the most common kind of magical adept. Whatever skill the adept picks, he will follow the normal rules for that skill.
Like other magicians, magical adepts must choose between the shamanic and hermetic traditions. They follow the rules in spell learning and so on for that tradition. Shamans get their totem benefits and penalties, if applicable to the skill. Adepts can use foci like any other magician, if it is applicable to their skill.
The principal difference (and it is an important one) between a magical adept and a full magician is that the adept has no access to astral space. A magical adept cannot use astral perception or projection at all.
SHAMANIC ADEPTS
A different form of adept is the shamanic adept, who, as the name implies, must be a shaman. This adept can only cast spells or conjure spirits for which a totem would offer modifiers. For example, a shamanic adept of the Bear totem can only cast health spells and can only conjure forest spirits.
Note that shamanic adepts do not receive totem modifiers for these activities. They are subject to all the usual requirements for their totem. For example, it is not possible to be a shamanic adept for the Coyote totem, because it does not receive any totem modifiers, nor is it possible with a totem such as Owl, whose spells receive a modifier based on time or place, but not purpose.
Shamanic adepts have full use of their Sorcery and Conjuring Skills for defensive purposes, and are capable of astral perception and projection.
PHYSICAL ADEPTS
A physical adept is dedicated to improving the body and its abilities. Powers attributed to legendary martial artists, warriors of shamanic peoples, berserkers, and the like, suggest that such adepts may have existed before the Awakening. The first publicly documented physical adept in modern times was Francis Daniels, an engineering Ph.D. and fourth dan aikido black belt. Much of the current understanding of the abilities of the physical adept are due to research Daniels conducted before his untimely death in the riots attending the collapse of the U.S. government in the Washington D.C. metroplex in 2030.
When a physical adept character is created, his Magic Rating Points are used to “buy” various improvements to the physical Attributes, Reaction, senses, and skills. The adept can also “buy” various unique powers, similar to the effects of certain spells. These become permanent abilities for the adept.
It should be noted that the character’s Magic Rating Points are not actually used up to “buy” the adept abilities. Rather, those points are used as a gauge of how many abilities the adept can acquire (a number of points up to his or her Magic Rating.)
The only magical focus of any use to a physical adept is a weapon focus. Foci are described in full beginning on p. 137. Note also that a physical adept cannot use astral perception, unless it is purchased as an ability. A physical adept cannot astrally project.
Powers of the Physical Adept
Astral Perception
Cost: 2
The adept has the ability to see into the astral plane via Astral Perception (p. 145), but cannot use astral projection. This enables the adept to use the Sorcery Skill in Astral Combat (see p. 147), but the character cannot cast spells nor does he have a Magic Pool.
Combat Sense
Cost: See below
The adept with combat sense power has an almost sixth sense about an area and any threats around him. Each level of this ability purchased gives the adept a number of extra dice in the Combat Pool, as well as the ability to spend Combat Pool dice to assist the Reaction Test in surprise situations (p. 86).
COMBAT SENSE POWER
Level	Combat Pool Dice	Cost
1	1			2
2	2			3
3	3			4
Improved Ability
Cost: See below
The physical adept is able to purchase additional dice for use with a specific general skill. Dice purchased for the general skill carry over equally to any Concentrations or Specializations of the skill that the character may know. In addition to the +2 target modifier received for every circle passed on the Skill Web (p. 69), any Improved Ability dice are reduced at a rate of one per circle crossed. For example, passing three dots would add a +6 modifier, while subtracting 3 Improved Ability dice.
There is an additional restriction on dice purchased for use with Combat Skills: the adept cannot have more extra dice than the character’s current Combat Skill Rating. Thus, a character with Firearms 4 cannot have more than 4 additional dice.
IMPROVED ABILITY COSTS
Area			Cost
Athletic Skills		.25/die
Stealth			.25/die
Combat Skills
Armed Combat	.5/die
Unarmed Combat	.5/die
Throwing		.5/die
Projectile Weapons	.5/die
Firearms		1/die
Gunnery		1/die
Improved Physical Attributes
Cost: See below
With this ability, the physical adept can raise a Physical Attribute (only Body, Strength, or Quickness), but not a Mental Attribute.
If the adept later wants to increase a Physical Attribute using Karma in the normal manner (p. 190), the cost is based on the total attribute rating, that is, including the magical improvements.
The actual cost of the ability depends on how much higher (or lower) than the character’s Racial Maximum is the final attribute rating.
IMPROVED ATTRIBUTE COSTS
Attribute Rating				Cost
Less than or equal to ½ Racial Maximum	.5 per +1 rating
Up to Racial Maximum			1 per +1 rating
Up to 1.5 × Racial Maximum			1.5 per +1 rating

Improved Physical Senses
Cost: .25 per improvement
These improvements include low-light or thermographic vision, high- or low-frequency hearing, enhanced smell or taste, and so on. Unless an improvement involves a radio or similar technological phenomena, anything that can be improved by cyberware can be improved by this power. Unlike cyberware, there are no package deals.
Increased Reaction
Cost: See below
Increased Reaction gives the physical adept additional points of Reaction, based on the degree of the ability purchased. Consult the table below. The adept receives only the Reaction bonus, but no additional Initiative dice.
INCREASED REACTION COST
Reaction Bonus				Cost/Point
Less than or equal to ½ Racial Maximum	.5 per +1
Up to Racial Maximum			1 per +1 rating
Up to 1.5 × Racial Maximum			2 per +1 rating

Increased Reflexes
Cost: See below
Increased Reflexes gives the adept additional Initiative dice, based on the degree of ability purchased. Consult the table below.
INCREASED REFLEXES COST
Extra Initiative Dice	Cost
1			1
2			4
3			6
Killing Hands
Cost: See below
Normal hand-to-hand damage does (Strength)M Stun damage. The physical adept may use his magic to turn his Unarmed Combat attacks into deadly Physical damage. When using Unarmed Combat, an adept with Killing Hands may choose to do either the normal Stun damage or the improved Physical damage, as purchased. See the table below for the costs for each of the four different levels of Killing Hands available. Technically, there is nothing to stop a physical adept from acquiring more than one of the levels, say, (Strength)L and (Strength)D.
The player must declare use of Killing Hands with the Unarmed Combat attack. The attack itself is effective against creatures with Immunity or magical defenses against normal weapons (see Powers of the Awakened, p. 214). Their defensive bonuses do not count against Killing Hands.
Note also that Killing Hands is a bare-handed strike and cannot be augmented by either weaponry or magic, though they may use other physical adept abilities like Improved Ability.
KILLING HANDS COST
Damage Level	Cost
(Strength)L		.5
(Strength)M		1
(Strength)S		2
(Strength)D		4
Pain Resistance
Cost: .5 per point
Pain Resistance allows the physical adept to ignore the effects (Injury and Initiative modifiers) of a number of boxes of damage equal to the number of points of Pain Resistance power acquired. Thus, a character with 3 points of Pain Resistance does not suffer any of the modifiers when taking Light or Moderate wounds. Once the character’s damage passes the Moderate wound level (more than 3 boxes), all injury and Initiative modifiers will apply normally. Points purchased work equally on both the Physical and Stun Condition Monitors.
Note that even if the character has 10 points of Pain Resistance, he will still go unconscious, and possibly die, once he reaches the Deadly wound level. What happens is that the character will show no signs of being injured until he simply drops.
Pain Resistance also allows the character to resist pain from torture, magic, illness, and so on. Add the number of points of Pain Resistance purchased to the target numbers for inflicting pain on the adept (e.g., torture interrogation); subtract them from the target number to resist pain (e.g., in a Body or Willpower Test against the symptoms of a painful disease). Again, Pain Resistance does not prevent or heal actual damage, but may prevent or reduce the damage’s effect on the character’s skills or Initiative.
Pain Resistance cannot be used to improve the outcome of any form of Damage Resistance Test.
PHYSICAL ADEPTS AND MAGIC
A physical adept can lose Magic Rating Points just like any other magician. Should that happen, the loss affects any improvements the character has purchased. An adept must give up 1 full point of improvement for every point of Magic lost.
Once a player has allocated Magic Rating Points to “buy” a power, that power cannot be changed, but it can be upgraded by spending more Magic points at a later time. For example, if a player puts 2 Magic points into Killing Hands (Strength)S, he could later raise the power to (Strength)D by “spending” 2 more points.
SORCERY
Sorcery is the art of spellcasting. Through it, a magician can command and shape the forces of astral space to a specific end. Shamans and mages can both cast spells without restriction, though the shaman must keep in mind totem modifiers.
Though both types of magician can cast spells that are, for all intents and purposes, identical within the Shadowrun game system, how they cast spells is entirely different.
Hermetic mages command the astral forces through very specific, practiced, precise formulas. Most of the effort is mental; the exercise of commanding the forces is a task of mental gymnastics and willpower. Some physical activity accompanies the spell, but it is minor compared to the work the mage’s mind is doing. Perhaps some words must be spoken, a minor gesture be made, or some symbolic material be used in some manner. Regardless, the mage calls up the mental multidimensional image of the spell formula, imposes it on the forces of reality at hand, then shapes, channels, and directs them to the desired end. The casting of a particular spell is an identical procedure each and every time, unless some parameter of the spellcasting has changed.
Shamans, however, rarely cast magic the same way twice. Their magic comes from intuition, improvisation, and an understanding of the moment. The forces of nature are called, not commanded. The shaman considers the forces of nature to be allies, not tools, allies to be praised for their assistance. The specifics of a shaman’s spellcasting vary with the moment and the situation. The calling of powers is very personal and must be tailored to the situation. Each dance, each chant, each song is different because each moment is different. Thus, each spellcasting is different. Like the mage, the shaman uses his mind to call on the unseen forces of magic, but his spellcasting has more external components in the form of dances, gestures, chants, or songs. Most of this is voluntary, however. When necessary, the shaman can call the forces of nature with barely a whisper.
That said, it should also be pointed out that though the method of spellcasting differs radically between mages and shamans, both cast the same spells within the game system. As far as the Shadowrun game is concerned, a mana blast spell is a mana blast, regardless of whether a mage or shaman casts it. The roleplaying of the spellcasting will differ, as explained above, but the procedure and the game statistics behind the spell are the same.
TYPES OF SPELLS
Spells come in two types and five categories. The two types are Physical and Mana, and the five categories are combat, detection, health, illusion, and manipulation spells. Each category includes many individual spells, which are listed and described in the Spell Directory, beginning on p. 151.
Physical Spells
Physical spells affect physical things. The magical energies of a physical spell are synchronized with the tangible aspects of a target: its composition, mass, momentum, appearance, and so on. Only physical spells can affect inanimate objects such as walls, rocks, and the like. Physical spells can affect living things, but they affect the physical nature and structure of the being.
If the target is a living being, he or she resists physical spells with the Body Attribute. Objects made of certain materials are more resistant to magical effects. See Casting Spells, p. 129, for more information. Unless otherwise noted, physical spells do Physical Damage.
Mana Spells
Mana spells affect the intangible elements of a target, such as the spirit or emotions. They are the only spells that can affect purely magical targets. Mana spells cannot affect inanimate objects on any level.
Mana spells are resisted by the target’s Willpower Attribute. Unless otherwise noted, mana spells do Physical Damage.
Combat Spells
Combat spells are quick, dirty, and violent. The energy of combat spells is channeled into the target directly from astral space through the target’s aura. The target is, effectively, attacked from within. Combat spells ignore the effects of armor and non-magical, external protections.
The target of a combat spell must, however, be within line-of-sight of the casting magician. The magician must be able to see the target, directly. The magician can ignore transparent obstructions such as clear glass, but not smoked or one-way glass. If the magician cannot see the target, he cannot affect the target, even if he is absolutely certain that the target is there, just out of line-of-sight. See Spell Targeting, p. 130, as well as the descriptions of Combat Spells, p. 151, for more information.
Combat spells can be either physical or mana spells.
Detection Spells
Detection spells are used to enhance the senses or to analyze the environment. They allow the magician, or the recipient of the spell, to sense things in a manner normally beyond his or her ability, to see or hear from a great distance, and so on. There are also spells that allow the magician to detect the presence of other beings, magic, life, and enemies. See p. 152 for the listing of detection spells.
Detection spells can be either physical or mana spells.
Health Spells
Health spells are concerned with the condition and performance of the body. They can be used to treat or heal injuries, purge poisons or toxins from a body, or affect Attribute Ratings. See p. 154 for the listing of health spells.
Health spells can be either physical or mana spells.
Illusion Spells
Illusion spells fool the senses. They can be used to deceive, create things that do not really exist, make things invisible, stimulate the senses, or provide simple or complex entertainment. See p. 155 for the listing of illusion spells.
Illusion spells, which affect the mind, are usually mana spells.

Manipulation spells
Manipulation spells can transform, transmute, control, or animate matter or energy. They are powerful, complex spells that are difficult to control and master. Manipulation spells can control the emotions or actions of a person, move objects or items, shape, create, or channel energy such as light or fire, or change a target’s form or appearance by changing its structure. See p. 156 for the listing of manipulation spells.
Unlike combat spells, a manipulation spell used for a violent, destructive purpose actually creates a tangible physical effect. A blast of flame from a manipulation spell strikes the target from the outside, which lets the target benefit from the protection of armor and such. Combat spells strike from within, bypassing armor. Manipulation spells, however, do not have the same line-of-sight restrictions as combat spells. See Spell Targeting, p. 130, and the listing of manipulation spells, p. 156.
Manipulation spells can be either physical or mana spells.
SPELL COMPONENTS
In addition to type and category, spells have several other components that affect their operation: Force, Range, Drain Level, Duration, and Exclusivity are explained in general terms here, and then dealt with more fully as needed in the Casting Spells section, p. 129.
Force
A spell’s Force sets how powerful it is. A Force 1 spell is a minimum-power spell of that type. To be cast, a spell must have at least a Force of 1.
Magicians learn spells at a specific Force. They voluntarily can cast the spell at a lower, reduced Force, but can never cast the spell at a higher Force than what they have learned. If the magician wants to increase the learned Force of a spell, he must re-learn the spell. See Learning A New Spell, p. 132.
The higher the Force of a spell, the greater its potential effect and the harder it is for the target to resist. High-Force spells are also more draining to the spellcaster. When choosing the Force at which to cast a spell, the magician must strike a balance between the spell’s effectiveness against the intended target and his own ability to absorb the Drain of casting the spell.
The Force of the spell is the base number of dice used to determine the spell’s success. These dice may be augmented from the Magic Pool (see p. 85), as the magician desires. See also Casting Spells, pp. 129.
Range
All spells have a Range at which they can be cast. For most spells, the Range is listed as LOS, which stands for line-of-sight. This means that if the magician can see the target, he can hit it with the spell, regardless of range. See Spell Targeting for more information.
Other spells, specifically health spells, have a listing of Touch. The caster of these spells must physically touch the intended target in order for the spell to work. If the target does not wish to be touched, the magician must also make a successful attack using the Unarmed Combat Skill. See Melee Combat, p. 100.
Detection spells that deal with the senses have a limited range of effect, but it is variable. At the time the spell is cast, the magician makes a separate Force Test against a Target Number of 4, plus any applicable injury modifiers. If the magician desires, he may augment the test with dice from the Magic Pool. These dice, however, must be separate from any dice allocated for the actual Spell Success Test. Multiply the number of successes from the Force Test by the magician’s Magic Rating to get the maximum range in meters at which the spell can operate.
Drain Level
A spell’s Drain Level reflects how casting the spell affects the magician himself. Spells with a higher Drain Level are more draining, more fatiguing, to the casting magician than those with lower Drain Levels.
Drain Levels are rated like a weapon’s Damage Level (M Stun, S Stun, and so on). Drain can, in fact, be viewed as a kind of attack by the energy of the spell being manipulated and channeled against the caster of the spell. The more power or energy in the spell (the higher the Force), the greater the potential that those same energies will have a damaging effect on the caster.
Drain damage is usually Stun damage, except under certain circumstances. If the Force of the spell exceeds the spellcasting magician’s Magic Rating, then the Drain damage is Physical damage. Because the magician has exceeded his body’s ability to channel energy, the potential damage shifts from fatigue (Stun damage) to actual damage (Physical damage) such as muscle pulls, burst blood vessels, and so on.
Drain damage is resisted like weapon damage. The magician rolls dice equal to his Willpower against the Drain Level, which is based on the Force of the spell cast. Successes reduce the Damage Level. See Casting Spells, specifically the Drain Resistance Test, p. 132.
Spell Duration
Three Durations are possible for spells in Shadowrun: Instant, Sustained, and Permanent.
Instant Spells take a Complex Action to cast. They take effect and vanish in the same action. Their effects are usually lasting, however. Combat spells and some manipulation spells fall into this category.
Sustained Spells can be maintained over time. They remain in effect as long as the magician maintains concentration on the spell, thereby sustaining it. When he loses his concentration, or when he voluntarily drops the spell, the spell’s effects disappear. Magicians who are sustaining spells suffer a universal target modifier of +2 per sustained spell. Because the magician must put so much concentration into sustaining the spell, this target modifier affects all other tests the magician must make while sustaining. A magician may simultaneously sustain a maximum number of spells equal to his Sorcery Skill. Magicians may maintain spells while astrally perceiving (p. 145), but not while astrally projecting (p. 146).
Permanent Spells must be sustained for some specified period of time before their effects become permanent. Health spells are an example. If the magician drops the spell before the required time has elapsed, the spell’s effects do not become permanent, but disappear instead.
Exclusivity
A spell, when learned, can be declared exclusive. This means that the spell cannot be stacked with another spell or be cast while another spell, or spells, are being separately sustained. An exclusive spell is the only one that the magician can cast, or have under his control, at that time. Exclusivity does, however, allow a spell to be cast at an effectively higher Force. See Learning A New Spell, p. 132.
SPELL STACKING
To cast a magic spell requires a Complex Action. Magicians may, however, stack multiple spells into one long spell and then cast them simultaneously with one Complex Action. The magician does, however, suffer a +2 target modifier to all target numbers involved in casting the spells and to resisting the Drain per stacked spell. Thus, a magician attempting to cast a Mana Bolt spell and an Armor spell simultaneously would have a +2 target modifier to all tests associated with casting of those two spells.
Additionally, Magic Pool dice must be allocated separately between the various stacked spells. See Magic Pool, p. 85, for more information.
Stacked spells are resolved in the order the casting magician desires.
MULTIPLE TARGETS
A magician may cast a single spell against multiple targets. To do so, however, he must split the Spell Force dice up among the targets. If casting a Force 6 spell against three targets, for example, the spellcaster could divide the dice up as 2 dice against each, or 4 against the first and 1 against each of the other two, or any other combination desired.
The caster must then make three separate Drain Resistance Tests against a base target number equal to the original, undivided, Drain of the spell. Magic Pool dice must be allocated against each of the targets individually and for each of the Drain Resistance Tests.
CASTING SPELLS
All spellcasting occurs within step C (Resolve Actions) of the Combat Turn sequence (p. 78). However, an additional option is open to a magician character during the previous step of Declare Actions. It is at that point that the magician allocates his Magic Pool dice for all the tests expected during this Action Phase. This is the moment when the magician should allocate Magic Pool Dice to assist in the spell’s Success Test, the caster’s Drain Resistance Test, or for use as Spell Defense dice (p. 132).
The following summary describes the basic steps in spellcasting. Each step is further explained in the subsequent sections. Remember, spellcasting itself occurs during the Resolve Actions step of the Combat Turn.
A. Determine Spell
Determine the spell and its specifics. Check to see if the current spell, or a currently sustained spell, is exclusive. Note whether the spell is physical or mana, what its category is, and its Duration.
B. Determine Target
Determine the target of the spell and check to be sure that it is valid. Watch for line-of-sight restrictions on the spell. Determine the base target number, which will vary with the spell cast and the target. Spellcasting target numbers for inanimate objects are given in the Object Resistance Table, p. 130.
C. Apply Situation Modifiers
Situation modifiers such as injury (p. 112), cover, and visibility modifiers (p. 89) apply to spellcasting. Targets within a hermetic circle, medicine lodge, or within a Mana Barrier spell also suffer a +1 target modifier per every 2 rating points of the circle or lodge, or every 2 Force Points of the barrier spell. Each spell currently sustained also adds +2 to the target number.
D. Make Spell Success Test
Roll a number of dice equal to the Force of the spell, plus any allocated Magic Pool dice, against the modified target number. Count the successes. If the spell does not require that the target make a Spell Resistance Test, apply the magician’s successes to determine the final effect, per the spell’s description.
E. Make Spell Resistance Test
If applicable, make the target’s Spell Resistance Test. Roll a number of dice equal to the target’s Body or Willpower (as appropriate to either a physical or mana spell), against a target number equal to the spell Force Rating. Count the successes. Magicians may add unused dice from their Magic Pool if they desire. If the cast spell was a damaging manipulation spell, then this test is actually a Damage Resistance Test, as in Ranged Combat. See Ranged Combat, p. 87, and Manipulation Spells, p. 156, for more information.
F. Determine Result
Compare the successes. If the spellcaster generated more successes than did the target, the spell’s effect is based on how many more net successes the spellcaster roll made than the target. See the specific spell description for the actual effect. If the target rolled more successes, the spell goes off but there is no effect.
G. Make Drain Resistance Test
To make the Drain Resistance Test, roll the spellcaster’s Willpower dice, plus any allocated Magic Pool dice, against a target number equal to the modified Force of the spell. Count the successes and reduce the Drain damage by one level for every two successes generated. Apply the remaining damage, if any, to the Stun Condition Monitor, or, if the Force of the spell exceeded the spellcaster’s Magic Rating, to the Physical Condition Monitor.
Spell Targeting
In choosing a target or targets, the magician can choose anything within sight. Sight is the key concept. Magicians cannot directly affect what they cannot see. Binoculars, glasses, telescopes, and other devices can enhance vision for spellcasting, as can any magic or technology that penetrates darkness. A magician cannot, however, cast spells directly at invisible beings or beings in astral space except by using enhanced vision or astral perception, as appropriate. Remote vision, such as through a telecom screen, security camera, or a remote-sensing spell like Clairvoyance are also useless for casting spells. A good rule of thumb is that magicians must be able to see their targets with their own eyes or a natural extension of those eyes. The image of the target must be the original image; nothing that translates the image into another medium works. So, optical binoculars work fine for spellcasting, but electronic binoculars that digitize the light from the image and computer-enhance it would not work.
Mirrors work fine, and transparent glass is no hindrance, but unless the mage is on the “see-through” side of a one-way mirror, that would not work either. Cybereyes work because the magician has paid Essence for them. The remote cameras of a drone, however, would not work. See Combat Spells (p. 151), Spells and Astral Space (p. 149), and Manipulation Spells (p. 156) for further discussions of vision and spell targeting.
Spell Target Numbers
The actual base target number varies with the type and category of spell. If the target is a living being, then the target number is usually the target’s Willpower, if the spell is a mana spell, or Body if the spell is a physical spell. If the target of a physical spell is an inanimate object, find the target number by consulting the Object Resistance Table in the following section.
Treat and Heal spells have separate target numbers. See individual spell descriptions.
Ranged damaging manipulation spells, such as Flamethrower, have a base Target Number 4. Situation target modifiers apply (see p. 89).
Inanimate Objects
The target number for spells cast against inanimate objects is based on the material from which the object is made. The more high-tech or processed the object is, the harder it is for magic to affect it. See the Object Resistance Table, below, for a list of sample objects and materials.
The target numbers listed in the table are the magician’s targets for the Spell Force Success Test.
OBJECT RESISTANCE TABLE
Category									Target Number
Natural Objects (trees, soil, unprocessed water)				3
Manufactured Low-Tech Objects and Materials (brick, leather)		5
Manufactured High-Tech Objects and Materials (advanced plastics, alloys, electronic equipment)	8
Highly Processed Objects (computers, complex toxic wastes)	10 or more

Area-Effect Spells
Some spells have an area effect, allowing them to affect more than one target at a time. The base radius of effect for all area-effect spells, regardless of category, is equal to the magician’s Magic Rating in meters. Regardless of the magician’s intent, area-effect spells affect all valid targets, friend, foe, and neutral alike, within the area of effect. For this reason, magicians often vary the area of effect. This is done by withholding dice from the Spell Success Test. The magician can reduce the base radius by 1 meter for every 2 dice withheld from the Spell Success Test. Conversely, he can also increase the area of effect. This is done in a similar manner, except that every 1 die withheld from the Spell Force Test increases the area-effect radius by 1 meter. Controlling this kind of power is much more difficult than letting it loose. The number of dice removed for area-effect modification may not exceed the Force Rating of the spell. Magic Pool dice can be used even if all the Force dice have been effectively removed, up to a maximum number equal to the original Force of the spell.
To make a Spell Success Test for an area-effect spell, roll the dice only once, then compare the results of that roll against the varying target numbers for each of the valid targets within the area of effect. The caster’s successes are counted separately for each target within the radius effect of the spell.
Situation Modifiers
Standard injury modifiers (p. 112), and cover and visibility modifiers (p. 89) apply to spellcasting. The harder it is to see a target, the harder it is to hit.
Magical protection, such as a Mana Barrier spell, applies a +1 target modifier for every 2 points of Force Rating the spell has. This modifier applies to all spells cast across the barrier, excluding those spells cast by the magician who erected the barrier.
Additionally, magic cast within a hermetic circle or medicine lodge is subject to a +1 target modifier for every 2 rating points of the circle or lodge. This modifier applies to all spells, with the exception of those cast by the mage who inscribed the hermetic circle, or by shamans of the totem appropriate to the medicine lodge.
If the magician is currently sustaining any spells (see p. 128), add an additional modifier of +2 per spell currently sustained.
Spells with a Touch requirement (hand-to-hand physical contact must be made) are subject only to injury modifiers.
Spell Success Test
To determine if the spell is successfully cast, make a Success Test with a number of dice equal to the Force of the spell, plus any allocated Magic Pool dice, against the target number calculated above. If no successes result, the spell is miscast and there is no effect. If the die results are all ones, the Rule of Ones applies, a misfire occurs and the target number for the Drain Resistance Test is increased by +2. If there are successes, count and keep track of them.
If the spell does not require that the target make a Spell Resistance Test, apply the successes according to the spell description to determine the final result.
Jason Eldrich is throwing a Power Dart spell at a mercenary. The spell has a Force Rating 4 and Jason is allocating 6 additional dice from his Magic Pool. The merc has a Body of 5.
Jason has a Light physical wound, and therefore receives a +1 to the target number for his Spell Success Test. The merc is standing in clear view, with nothing blocking or interrupting Jason’s view of him, so neither cover nor visibility modifiers apply. The spell is not exclusive, and the mage has no spells sustained, so the target modifiers for those do not apply.
Rolling the dice, Jason gets a total of 10 (4+6) against a Target Number 6 (5+1). The results are 1, 3, 4, 5, 5, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6. Five of the dice score as 5 or better, so there are 5 successes.
Spell Resistance Test
If the spell requires it, the target can now make a Spell Resistance Test. The base number of dice rolled is equal to the resisting attribute (Body or Willpower). If the target is a magician with Magic Pool dice, or if he has previously allocated Spell Defense dice to protect him (see Spell Defense Dice, p. 132), he may add those additional dice to the test.
The target number for this test is equal to the Force of the spell being resisted.
The mercenary who Jason Eldrich targeted with his Power Dart spell now gets to make his Spell Resistance Test. The character has a Body of 5, so he rolls 5 dice against a Target Number 4, which is the Force Rating of the spell. As the mercenary is not a magician, he cannot add Magic Pool dice to the test, and no other characters had the forethought to allocate Spell Defense dice to him, so all he rolls are the 5 dice.
The results of the roll are a 2, 2, 3, 5, and 6. Two of the dice score as 4 or better, so there are 2 successes.
If the spell cast is a damaging manipulation spell, then this is actually a Damage Resistance Test, as in Ranged Combat (see p. 87). The reason is that damaging manipulations create energy in the physical world, and that energy is “hurled” or directed against the target, much like a ranged weapon. See Manipulation Spells, p. 156, for more information.
Determining Spell Result
If no Spell Resistance Test is necessary, the successes generated from the Spell Success Test are used directly, in accordance with the spell description, to determine the final result.
Against resisting targets, compare the spellcaster’s successes against the target’s successes in the Spell Resistance Test. If the target generated more successes, the spell does not affect him. The spell was successfully cast, however, so its presence may be visible even though the target is unaffected.
If the spellcaster and the target make the same number of successes, the tie goes in favor of the attacker, with the spell’s minimum effect done. For example, most combat spells start with a Damage Level of Light. On a tie, such a spell would do Light damage. Some spells, however, do not have a minimum effect. To be successful, these spells require at least one success in the spellcaster’s favor.
If the spellcaster rolls more successes than the target, the spell has an effect. The spell’s effect is measured by the difference between the spellcaster’s and the target’s successes.
Gamemasters and players should be sure to consult the descriptions of the spells involved, as well as the section describing the type of spell, for special rules or considerations. Objects that do not have specific rules assigned to them (such as Vehicles, p. 108) use a number of resistance dice equal to the value given on the Object Resistance Table, p. 130.
Jason Eldrich’s Power Dart spell hits the mercenary. Jason has 5 successes, the mercenary only 2. The difference between them is 3, in Jason’s favor, so the Power Dart’s success is measured in 3 successes.
According to the spell’s description, the spell has a Damage Level of Light. The spell has 3 successes, but because it requires 2 successes to increase the damage one level, the mercenary takes only a Moderate physical wound. If Jason had generated 6 successes, or the mercenary 1 less, for a total difference of 4 successes, the mercenary would take a Serious physical wound.
Drain Resistance Test
Lastly, the spellcaster must make a Drain Resistance Test. Roll a base number of dice equal to his Willpower Rating, plus any Magic Pool dice that have been allocated to resist Drain. The target number is the Spell Force Rating, modified by the Drain notation given with the spell’s description. No target modifiers apply to this test. Every 2 successes rolled in the Drain Resistance Test lowers the Drain by one level.
Jason now has to worry about Drain. He has a Willpower Rating of 6 and has allocated 2 dice (his last 2) from his Magic Pool to help in the Drain Resistance Test. This gives him a total of 8 dice rolled against a Target Number 4. The Power Dart spell has a Drain Level of Light, so Jason needs to roll only 2 successes to reduce the Drain to 0.
The dice are rolled, and Jason’s luck fails. The results are 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4. Only 1 die resulted in a 4 or better, so he has only 1 success. Needing 2 to stage the damage down one level, Jason is unable to do so and takes a Light Stun wound.
NOTICING SPELLCASTING
Just how obvious is spellcasting? Not very, unless the observer knows what he is looking at and is paying attention. The raw power and complexity of the spell also matter.
Noticing a spellcasting requires a Perception Test, that is, Intelligence dice rolled against a target number equal to twice the difference between the Force of the spell being cast and the Magic Rating of the spellcaster. A magician with a Magic Rating of 6, for example, is attempting to quietly cast a spell with a Force Rating 4. Any characters watching would have to beat a Target Number of 4 (6 minus 4, doubled) to notice it. If the spell had been Force Rating 2, the Target Number would be 8.
Situation modifiers should also be applied. See Perception, p. 185, for the list of the most common modifiers. Beyond those listed there, the Gamemaster may wish to apply an additional -2 modifier if the observing character is also a magician. An astrally projecting or perceiving character automatically notices the colorful astral display associated with spellcasting.
SPELL DEFENSE DICE
Magicians may, immediately following the declaration of their actions, allocate dice from their Magic Pool as Spell Defense. This is an area effect that encompasses all characters or objects within the allocating magician’s vision (direct line-of-sight) that the magician chooses to protect.
These dice act as a kind of defensive Magic Pool for all it protects, including the casting magician. When protected characters or objects are attacked by magic, the magician that allocated the Spell Defense dice in the first place can choose to use those dice to protect that target. Spell Defense dice, once expended, are lost until reallocated at the time the Magic Pool refreshes. Spell Defense must be reallocated.
In order to benefit from defensive magic dice, characters must be within view of the controlling magician at the time the dice are used in their favor. Again, like spellcasting, the view that works is normal vision or a natural extension of it.
Neddy, injured in a previous fight, has been sitting overwatch as his chummers do the final exchange of data and Nuyen at the end of what has been a particularly taxing shadowrun. Neddy has allocated 6 of his Magic Pool dice as Spell Defense dice and is using them to protect the teammates whom he can see (four of them) and the satchel carrying the goods.
Suddenly, something goes wrong, and magic begins raining down on the meet site. Two of Neddy’s chummers are targeted, so Neddy spends 2 dice from the Spell Defense Pool on each of them (a total of 4 dice). He holds 2 of the dice in reserve in case something else is up and the sudden magic is only a diversion.
When the two protected characters make their Spell Resistance Tests against the incoming magic, they add 2 more dice to the test, thanks to the Spell Defense dice Neddy has allocated to them.
LEARNING A NEW SPELL
Before a magician can cast a spell, it must be learned. He can learn it from another magician who already knows it, or design it himself if he has the spell formula. Spell design is not covered in this book, but is included in The Grimoire, the advanced magic sourcebook for use with the Shadowrun game system.
Teachers cost numerous Nuyen. The teacher cannot do anything else while coaching the magician one on one for as long as it takes to learn the spell. If the teacher quits before the magician learns the spell, all the time spent is wasted. Teachers charge what the market will bear, but a typical price is 1,000 times the Spell Force Rating, plus living expenses.
Teaching a spell does not take the Magic Rating that casting it does. As long as the teacher magician is still functional (at least 1 Magic Rating point left), he can instruct the student in spells at any Force the latter desires, up to the maximum at which the teacher knows the spell.
A shaman learning a new spell spends time chanting, dancing, and carrying on. This whips up the kind of emotional peak shamans need to contact the spell energy. The shaman must study in a medicine lodge with a rating at least equal to the Spell Force. A mage spends time in meditation, intense study, and formal ritual. The mage needs peace and quiet and a sorcery library with a rating at least equal to the Spell Force.
Shamans and mages make bad neighbors and worse roommates. The differences between “hermetic nerds” and “party shamans” are a running gag on the popular trivid series The Odd Coven.
Learning a spell requires a Success Test using dice from the character’s Sorcery and Magical Theory Skills. The Target Number is twice the desired Force. A shaman gets totem modifiers, if appropriate. A mage may get extra dice if aided by an elemental appropriate to the spell. All target number modifiers for damage to the magician apply, as do distractions for sustaining spells, bad conditions, and so on.
If the instructing mage has an appropriate Special Skill, such as Teaching, he can make a Teaching Test against a target number equal to the Spell Force Rating, minus the pupil’s Intelligence, with a minimum Target Number 2. Successes from this test reduce the magician’s target number.
Learning a spell requires a base number of days equal to the desired Force. Divide this by the number of successes. The minimum time is one day. Learning spells also costs Karma (see p. 190) equal to the desired Force.
If the player rolls no successes, the learning attempt fails. The magician has wasted his time, a number of days equal to Force. Fortunately, failed study does not cost Karma, but teachers will still expect to be paid. Never stiff a man who can throw a fireball, comprende?
RESTRICTED USE SPELLS
When learning a spell, the magician can accept limitations on its use, even if the teacher does not know the spell in that form. These restricted-use spells are exclusive spells and fetish-required spells. Having learned these spells, a magician can cast them with a Force Rating higher than his Magic Rating without risking Physical damage. The Force modifier for restricted use applies to that spell permanently. If the magician wants to know the spell with different options, he must learn it all over again, at which point he will know both versions of the spell.
An exclusive spell allows the spell to be cast as if its Force Rating were 2 points higher, for the purposes of determining the spell’s effect. Drain is calculated at the normal Force value, however. When casting an exclusive spell, the magician cannot sustain or cast any other spells in the same action. When sustaining an exclusive spell, the magician cannot cast any other spells or use another magical skill.
Neddy, who has a Magic Rating of 6, wants to be able to toss a killer Fireball spell. He accepts the exclusive spell modifier (-2) and learns the spell at Force 6. Neddy is able to cast his Fireball spell at Force 8, without exceeding his Magic Rating, but he must also abide by all the restrictions for using an exclusive spell.
A fetish-required spell is cast at 1 Force Rating Point higher if a reusable fetish is used, or at 2 Force Rating Points higher for an expendable fetish. The magician needs some physical object to cast the spell, choosing it at the time of learning the spell. This prop is a fetish, an anthropological term that means a ritual item used in “primitive” magic. (Primitive to those mundane chummers, maybe.) The magician must have a fetish in hand to use it. If the magician is wearing the fetish, he need only touch it. The fetish belongs to a specific spell, and the same one cannot be used for different spells.
Fetishes can be purchased from a talismonger, with prices depending on the spell’s category. A magician cannot substitute one fetish for another, but a reusable fetish is a durable object that can be used again and again. An expendable fetish is used up or destroyed when the spell is cast. In other words, the spell needs ammo that must be replaced every time.
It is possible to learn a spell requiring either an expendable or a reusable fetish, but not both.
The magician can allocate Magic Pool dice, based on the adjusted rating of the spell with an exclusivity or fetish-required Force modifier. See Magic Pool, p. 85, for more information.
Shamanic Fetishes
Reusable: Drums, rattles, knives, tomahawks, spears, carved wooden or bone wands, native jewelry, carvings, masks, and medicine bags, pouches filled with a complex mixture of minerals, herbs, and animal parts.
Expendable: Small packets of herbs, curiously shaped twigs, tufts of feathers or animal hair, small stones or crystals, crude miniature weapons, bits of bone, shells, and so on.
Hermetic Fetishes
Reusable: Ornate wands (usually jeweled), rings, amulets and other jewelry, complex illustrated scrolls covered with diagrams, and such.
Expendable: Small parchment talismans, chemical mixtures or potions, crystals or stones, painted charms, and so on.
Starting Spells
With the Gamemaster’s permission, a magician can begin the game with spells that have Force modifiers. The spell would be purchased at the original Force Rating (paying that number of Force Points) and then modified per the Force modifier.
The maximum Force Rating of 6 still applies, however, for starting characters.

RITUAL SORCERY
Ritual sorcery is a spellcasting process in which the spell builds gradually, taking hours to complete. This lets magicians cooperate, pooling their skills and power. It also allows magicians to cast spells on targets that are not within visual range. Use the Ritual Sorcery Concentration Rating of the Sorcery Skill for all tests in this section.
A shaman must be in a medicine lodge with a rating at least equal to the Force of the spell being ritually cast. A mage must be in a hermetic circle for the spell being cast, with the circle’s rating at least equal to the spell’s Force.
Ritual sorcery requires special materials. These materials are generalized, and the magician need only pay the cost and keep track of which materials he has on hand. Following are the costs for materials needed to perform various types of ritual sorcery spells:
Detection materials cost 100¥ times the spell’s Force Rating.
Health materials cost 500¥ times the Force.
Illusion materials cost 100¥ times the Force.
Manipulation materials cost 1,000¥ times the Force.
Magicians cannot cast combat spells using ritual sorcery. Casting the spell uses up the materials, regardless of the outcome of the spell.
MATERIAL LINK
If the magician cannot see the target, he needs a material link to perform ritual sorcery. If the target is a living being, the material link is a tissue sample that contains the being’s DNA pattern. If the target is not a living being, the magician needs an integral piece of its structure. The magician could, for example, target a building using a brick pried from one of its walls, but he could not use a picture that once hung inside.
If a ritual team is involved in the spellcasting, however, one of its members can astrally guide the spell toward its target, making a material link unnecessary. See Astral Guiding in the next section.
RITUAL TEAMS
Ritual sorcery lets magicians cooperate in casting a spell, but all members of a ritual team must know the spell. The magicians must belong to the same tradition, but shamans of different totems may cooperate in a ritual team. The maximum size of a ritual team is equal to the lowest Sorcery Skill Rating among the members. A chain is only as strong as its weakest link. If a magician has a Sorcery Skill Rating 4, for example, only three other magicians can join him on the team.
Once the ritual begins, the magicians are linked together magically. The entire ritual counts as one spellcasting action, which affects how magical items are used. A Rating 4 focus, for example, adds 4 dice over the course of the whole ritual, not at each stage of the ritual. The ritual team should designate one of its magician members as leader. All tests use that character’s modifiers for totems and equipment, not those for the totem of the medicine lodge.
At the beginning of the ritual, all the magicians combine their Magic Pools into one. Because the entire ritual is a single action, this pool is not refreshed at any time during the ritual and team members cannot use their individual Magic Pools unless that individual withdraws from the team. If any member does so, reduce the remaining dice in the pool by the number of dice in the withdrawing character’s Magic Pool. Should this exhaust the ritual team’s pool, the spell aborts and all team members must make a Drain Resistance Test, whether they have pulled out or not.
Modifiers affecting one member of the team (wounds, for example) affect only that individual. They do not change the overall effectiveness of the team except if the leader is the one affected.
Astral Guiding
In astral guiding, a team member is used to “spot” the target in astral space, making a material link unnecessary. This team member does not contribute to the Magic Pool for the rite, but is subject to Drain along with everybody else. If this forward observer is killed or driven away from the target, the spell aborts and all team members must make Drain Resistance Tests. The observer must stay in astral space until the sending of the spell is complete.
CASTING RITUAL SORCERY SPELLS
The following summary briefly outlines the sequence of steps in casting a spell by ritual sorcery. These steps are explained in detail in the next section.
A. Prepare for Sending
The ritual team chooses the spell, combines the Magic Pool dice (if available) of all the team members, and the leader declares the Force of the spell to be cast.
B. Form Material Link
If the target is in view of a ritual team member guiding the sending from astral space, skip this step. If not, the team must lock the spell on target using the material link. This takes a number of hours equal to the Spell Force Rating. At that time the leader spends dice from the Ritual Magic Pool against a target number based on the link and the distance to the target.
C. The Sending
Having built up the spell’s power, the team now directs it against the target. The sending takes a number of hours equal to the spell’s Force. Use dice from the Ritual Magic Pool against a target number based on the nature of the target, specifics of the target’s situation, and the specifics of the spell involved.
D. Determine the Effect
The spell’s effect is now assessed as if it were a regular spell. The Spell Success Test is made with Ritual Magic Pool dice against a target number determined by the spell and the target. The actual effect is per the spell’s description.
E. Resist Drain
The ritual team now resists Drain. Each member of the team makes a Drain Resistance Test, just as though he had cast the spell alone. Any dice remaining in the Ritual Magic Pool may be divided up among the team members as the leader wishes. This step occurs even if the ritual sorcery aborts at any stage along the way.
Preparation
After preparing the place for working the spell (the medicine lodge or hermetic circle), the team members combine their Magic Pools into the Ritual Magic Pool. Dice cannot be drawn from the Ritual Magic Pool without the leader’s permission, unless the magician who wishes to do so also withdraws from the team. The leader declares the Force of the spell to be cast. Team members cannot sustain or cast other spells when working in ritual sorcery, and so they must drop any such spells as part of the preparation step.
Material Link
If the target is in sight or being observed in astral space, skip this stage and move on to the next step, The Sending. Otherwise, the team must lock on to the target using the material link. This takes a base time in hours equal to the Force of the spell. At the end of that time, the leader allocates dice from the Ritual Magic Pool for a Success Test. The target number depends on how closely the team can pinpoint the target’s location, per the table below. Apply modifiers appropriate to the nature of the target and any protection it has, also found on the table.
A single success is sufficient to link the spell to the target. Divide the successes into the base time for the linking (Force in hours) to determine the actual time it takes. If the team achieves no successes, the spell aborts and each team member makes a Drain Resistance Test.
MATERIAL LINK TABLE
||Target Location					||Target Number||
|City or county known					|5|
|State, province, or country known			|7|
|Continent known					|9|
|Unknown						|11|
Modifiers				
||Modifier								|Adjustment|
|Target is magically active				|+2|
|Target is behind a mana barrier			|+Barrier Rating|
|Target is in a hermetic circle or medicine lodge	|+Rating|

The Sending
Having built up the spell’s power, the team now directs it against the target. The Sending takes a base time in hours equal to the Force of the spell. The leader allocates dice from the Ritual Magic Pool for a Success Test against a target number determined by the spell and target (e.g., Willpower for mana spells, Body for physical spells, or Object Resistance Table for inanimate targets). Apply situation modifiers (e.g., injury, cover, visibility, sustained spells).
Divide the successes into the base time to determine the actual time taken. If no successes are achieved, the spell aborts, and each team member makes a Drain Resistance Test.
Noticing the Sending
During this time, any magician who sees the target from astral space has a chance of noticing what Is happening. An observer should make an intelligence test against a target number equal to Force of the sending, minus the number of hours Into the sending when the observation takes place. Only 1 success is needed to recognize and identify the sending.
If the target is a magician, there Is a chance that he too will notice the sending. The chance Is calculated as above for an outside observer, except the target number Increases by +2.
Determine the Effect
If this Is an area spell, the base radius is equal to the ritual team leader's Magic Rating. and It can be altered by subtracting dice from the pool, per the normal rules for area-effect spells. p. 130.
Make a normal Spell Success Te.st using dice from the Ritual Magic Pool. Because the material link has been established. Modifiers for hermetic circles, medicine lodges, and mana barriers do not apply. Modifiers for cover and visibility do not apply either. Only any Injury modifiers the leader may have apply, if the leader is a shaman, totem modifiers also apply.
The spell Is resolved in the normal manner, per the spell description. If a Spell Resistance Test is necessary, it is made against a target number equal to the Force of the spell or the ritual team leader's Ritual Sorcery Skill, whichever Is higher. Allies of the target may allocate Spell Defense dice (p. 132) If they are aware of the sending prior to his arrival.
Sustaining Ritual Sorcery
If the spell is successful. and requires sustaining, the ritual team can sustain It by allocating any remaining dice from the Ritual Magic Pool to that end. A ritual spell may be maintained for a number of hours equal to the Magic Rating of the team leader multiplied by the number of dice. Mages can also use an elemental to maintain the spell for a number of days equal to the Spell Force Rating. (See the ElementaI rules later In this chapter.)
The magicians on the ritual team may also maintain the spell themselves. They can simply stay locked Into a team. Concentrating on the spell. This still leaves an astral path leading back to the team, though, and also counts as sustaining a spell, adding +2 to the Drain Resistance Test for each team member. Magicians sustaining a spell in this manner need not remain physically adjacent. but they can only undertake non-Intensive mundane tasks while sustaining the spell.
Tracking Back a Sending it is possible to track back a detected sending. Once someone has noticed the sending. tendrils of power can be seen reaching across astral space, linking the ritual caster(s) and the target. To follow this path a magician uses the Astral Tracking rules on p. 149.
Once the ritual caster(s) is found, he can be attacked in astral space. During the sending stage the ritual team Is considered to be present in astral space and therefore vulnerable to Astral Combat (see p.147).
If time and distance allow. the target can mount a physical assault on the ritual team. If the team has no physical defenders. This works very well. If the magicians do not pull their dice out of the pool for use in defending themselves. they become sitting ducks. And if they do pull out their dice, it aborts the ritual.
Resist Drain
The ritual team now resists Drain. Each member of the team acts as if he had cast the spell alone. making a Drain Resistance Test. The leader decides how to divide up any remaining Ritual Magic Pool dice among the team members.
If team members have extra dice for the spell because of foci. totem modifiers, or spirit aid they have not previously used In casting this spell. they may add those dice as well.  Drain Is handled per the Individual spell.

FOCI
Foci (the plural of focus) are items of magical power used by magicians. Due to their magically active genetic structure, only magicians can use foci. To a mundane, a focus appears as its physical form or material. To a magician, it is a source of channeled power, a tool to assist in casting spells or conjuring spirits.
Foci must be enchanted to be useful. In these basic Shadowrun rules, magicians use pre-enchanted foci purchased from talismongers. Rules for creating foci are in The Grimoire, the advanced magic sourcebook.
There are five basic classes of foci:
Spell Foci: Aid in sorcery.
Spirit Foci: Assist in conjuring.
Power Foci: Boost the Magic Pool.
Spell Locks: Sustain spells.
Weapon Foci: Enhance combat.
All foci, except spell locks, have a rating of at least 1, often higher. Higher ratings indicate greater power. Spell locks cannot have a rating above 1.
AVAILABILITY
Foci are generally available through talismongers (dealers in arcane objects). The more powerful the focus, the less likely it is to be available at any given time. Consult the Gear chapter for prices and availability.
BONDING A FOCUS
A magician must bond a focus before using it by spending Karma, the amount depending on the focus type and rating. Consult the Focus Bonding Table below.
Once the required Karma is paid, the bonding magician gains access to the focus’s bonuses or abilities. Only one magician can bond a single item at a time, and only that magician can use it. If a magician acquires another’s focus, they must spend Karma to bond it.
FOCUS BONDING TABLE
||Item||Karma Cost||
|Specific Spell Focus	|	Rating|
|Spell Category Focus	|	3 × Rating|
|Spirit Focus		|	2 × Rating|
|Sustaining Focus	|	Rating|
|Power Focus		|	5 × Rating|
|Spell Lock		|	1 Karma Point|
|Weapon Focus, Small	|	4 × Rating|
|Weapon Focus, Large	|	5 × Rating|


USING A FOCUS
A magician must activate a focus with a Simple Action, but no action is required to use or apply it. Using a weapon focus occurs during an armed attack, a Complex Action per Melee Combat rules (p. 100).
The number of active foci a magician can have is equal to their Intelligence Rating. Once activated, a focus operates as long as it is on the magician’s person (worn, carried, or held). If snatched or dropped, it deactivates, and benefits are lost until recovered. The focus need not be re-bonded if retrieved by the same magician. Spell locks are an exception, discussed below.
SPELL FOCI
Spell foci provide extra dice for a specific spell or spell category, divided into two subtypes: specific spell foci and spell category foci. Both provide additional dice equal to their rating, treated like Magic Pool dice (refreshing at the magician’s next action) but not added to the Magic Pool due to their specific uses.
Specific Spell Foci
A specific spell focus provides extra dice equal to its rating for casting and Drain Resistance Tests for one specific spell, chosen at bonding. These dice cannot assist in defending against the same spell cast by another magician or be used as Spell Defense dice.
Spell Category Foci
Spell category foci apply to all spells within a single category (e.g., combat, detection), specified at bonding. They provide extra dice equal to their rating for Spell Success or Drain Resistance Tests for any known spells in that category and can assist in resisting spells from that category cast by others. They cannot be used as Spell Defense dice.
SPIRIT FOCI
Spirit foci provide extra dice for conjuring, with the specific spirit type (e.g., water elemental, hearth spirit) declared at bonding. They only work for that spirit type, providing additional dice equal to their rating for summoning, banishing, or controlling that spirit, and for the Drain Resistance Test. The magician can use up to the focus’s rating in dice across all tests for summoning a single spirit (see Conjuring, pp. 139–44).
SUSTAINING FOCI
A sustaining focus allows a Magician to sustain a spell effect equal to or below its Rating without the Magician actively maintaining the spell. The spell may be cast at any time and “saved” into the focus to be used whenever the focus is activated.
Limit: Power: To add the stored spell effect to a dice pool, the focus must be activated
POWER FOCI
Power foci are the most flexible and powerful foci. They increase a magician’s Magic Rating by their value, allowing higher-Force spells without Physical Drain, and add dice equal to their rating to the Magic Pool. These bonus dice can be used for any Magic Pool purpose.
SPELL LOCKS
Spell locks establish a link with astral space to sustain a spell without the caster’s concentration. They are not pre-bonded. After casting a sustainable spell, the magician expends 1 Karma to link the spell lock to the spell and astral space, sustaining it. Casting and bonding occur simultaneously, preventing recasting for more successes.
Spell locks can be created and given to another magician of the same tradition (shamanic or hermetic) for placement and activation (Simple Action, by touch). Anyone can place the lock, but only a compatible magician can activate it. The lock is dormant until activated, visible via astral perception.
The lock must contact its target (worn, hung, or pocketed). Once placed, it becomes invisible to mundanes but visible to astral perception. A magician can remove it, breaking the link and rendering it dormant until re-bonded for a new spell. The creating magician can activate/deactivate it with a Simple Action, counting toward their active foci limit regardless of location.
Drawbacks include an astral energy thread linking the lock to its creator, traceable via Astral Tracking (p. 149). Active spell locks serve as material links for ritual sorcery, making the creator vulnerable.
WEAPON FOCI
Known as magic weapons, weapon foci add their rating to the user’s Armed Combat Skill in combat, usable by magically active characters (Magic Rating ≥ 1) who have bonded them, including adepts. Despite research, missile weapons cannot be enchanted, as foci only function in the owner’s hands.
Weapon foci increase damage in astral combat (p. 147) and bypass paranormal creatures’ defenses against normal weapons (p. 214). In astral projection, the focus’s image accompanies the magician, usable against astral entities. Against regenerating critters (p. 219), a Deadly wound or takedown requires an Essence Test (TN = focus rating × 2). Failure prevents regeneration; success allows a normal regeneration test.
All weapon foci contain orichalcum, a magical alloy of copper, gold, silver, and mercury, rich yellow-orange, first discovered in Atlantis per legend.
ATTACKING THROUGH A FOCUS
There is a disadvantage to having an active focus of any kind. Being a continually powered astral energy, a magical focus creates a continual, open bridge from astral to mundane space. This is dangerous.
A spell cannot normally be cast from astral to mundane space, or vice versa. These two different realms are separated by an interface that can only be crossed under specific circumstances and criteria. Spellcasting is not one of them. This means that characters who are in mundane space, and have no connection to astral space, are safe from any astrally projecting magicians or exclusively astral spirits or creatures.
A focus, by virtue of its nature, creates a pathway between the two realms. Through this channel, an astrally present magician can cast a spell at the focus' physical component. Because the spell is affecting the physical materials of the focus, the spell must be a physical type.
Though it may seem that only the focus itself can be affected in this manner, that is not completely true. If the astrally projecting magician were to cast an area-effect spell centered on the focus, it would be possible to hit all targets within the spell's effect area. Due to the nature of how this effect works, manipulation spells cannot be used in this manner.
Attacking through a focus is a two-step procedure. First come the tests to attack and resist the spell. If the defender fails to resist, the effects of the attack are then resolved.
The attacking magician rolls a number of dice equal to the Force Rating of the spell against a target number equal to the rating of the focus. At the same time the defender rolls a number of dice equal to the rating of the focus against a target number equal to the Force of the spell. The side that generates more successes defeats the other. If the spell wins, the spell focus bonding is broken. This renders the focus useless, and the spell grounds into the physical material of the focus. If the focus wins, the attacking spell does not ground into it, and dissipates.
Remember that the attacking spell must be a physical spell to work in this manner. If the spell is not an area-effect spell, it only affects the target that is either in possession of the focus or else directly connected to it. Resolve the spell effects normally using the Casting Spells rules, p. 129.
If the spell is an area-effect spell, the only difference from resolving it in the normal manner is that line-of-sight is determined from the spellcaster's position in astral space. The requirement still holds that the spellcaster must be able to see the target. Remember also that astral space is special terrain. See Astral Space, p. 145. 
CONJURING
Through conjuring, a magician can summon, control, and banish different kinds of spirits. Though magicians and occultists are still arguing about whether spirits have a separate existence of their own or whether they spring purely from the formless energies of astral space at the time of conjuring, it does not much matter for all practical purposes.
There are many kinds of spirits, each with a Force Rating assigned by the conjuring magician. The Force Rating determines not only the spirit’s abilities, but the difficulty of handling it. The more powerful a spirit (the higher its Force), the more difficult it is to summon, control, or banish.
Two types of spirits that can be summoned with relative ease are nature spirits and elementals. Nature spirits personify the forces of the environment, and only a shaman can summon or control them.
Elementals arise from the four hermetic elements of fire, water, air, and earth, and only a mage can summon or control them. Nature spirits and elementals are described briefly below, but their full abilities and descriptions appear in the Critters section, p. 224.
Though other kinds of spirits also inhabit the Sixth World, most can only be contacted by very experienced magicians who have Karma to burn. These will be described in future Shadowrun products.
SUMMONING NATURE SPIRITS
A shaman can summon a nature spirit only in that spirit’s home domain. A domain is the environment that spirit personifies: storm spirits require open air, forest spirits heavy woods, hearth spirits an occupied home, and so on (see Domains, below). A shaman cannot summon a spirit from outside the spirit’s domain. A shaman could not, for example, summon a storm or forest spirit inside a home. A home is the domain of the hearth spirit.
The shaman decides how powerful is the spirit to be summoned. The Force of the spirit, the gauge of its power, is the target number for the Conjuring Test. Totem modifiers and extra dice from spirit foci also apply to this test. Note that the Magic Pool does not assist in any Conjuring-related Tests.
Each success in the Conjuring Test represents one service that the spirit agrees to perform for the shaman. See Nature Spirit Services, below. If the shaman rolls no successes, no spirit comes. The summoning of a nature spirit requires a Complex Action. A shaman can summon only one nature spirit or have one in service to him at one time.
Regardless of whether or not a spirit comes, the shaman must make a Drain Resistance Test. Charisma (not Willpower) dice are used, adjusted by totem modifiers and spirit foci, against a target number equal to the Force Rating of the nature spirit. Consult the Conjuring Drain Table below for the Drain associated with conjuring a nature spirit.
Every 2 successes generated in the Drain Resistance Test reduce the Drain by one level. If the Drain knocks the shaman unconscious, the spirit departs.
Nature spirits vanish at sunrise and sunset, no matter what, and regardless of whether the sun is actually visible or not. All services end at that time. Any services left unused or unspecified by that time are lost.
CONJURING DRAIN TABLE


||Spirit’s Force Rating||Drain Level||
|Less than half shaman’s Charisma|(L) Stun|
|Shaman’s Charisma or less|(M) Stun|
|Greater than shaman’s Charisma|(S) Physical|
|Greater than twice shaman’s Charisma|(D) Physical|

Domains
As stated above, a nature spirit’s domain is the environment that it personifies. Nature spirits only have power within their domain. They cannot cross out of that domain, nor extend their power from it.
Some nature spirits have domains that may seem to cross into other domains, but it is never the case. The domain of a broad-environment spirit is always superseded by the domain of a limited environment spirit such as a hearth spirit. So even if an extremely rich person had a spacious home with the air-space equivalent of an aircraft hangar it would still be the domain of a hearth spirit and not one of the sky spirits.
Domains are very restrictive. A city spirit can exercise search power on the streets, squares, and plazas of a city. It cannot, however, successfully search if it is inside an occupied building (hearth spirit territory), a park (forest spirit), in a boat on the river (river spirit) or on Puget Sound (ocean spirit).
Nature Spirit Services
When summoned, the nature spirit first appears in its astral form, visible in the physical world as a slight shimmering in the air. The more powerful the spirit, the more noticeable this effect. The Force of the nature spirit, subtracted from 12, can be used as the Concealability of this effect. See the Concealability rules, p. 94. The spirit can either remain there or be instructed by the shaman to return to its environment to await another call at a later time. The actual summoning of a nature spirit requires a Complex Action, but it takes only a Simple Action to call the spirit once it has been placed on “stand-by.”
To perform a service, a nature spirit will use one of its powers as the shaman directs. A nature spirit in its astral form, present only in astral space, can only use those powers that directly protect or benefit the shaman, such as concealment, guard, or movement. To use its powers on others, a nature spirit must assume its manifest form.
A manifest spirit can only use its powers on an individual target or group, depending on the power. Continual use of a specific power counts as only one service. If, however, the shaman wishes to change the parameters of its use, say by requesting that the spirit use concealment power on more characters than previously, this constitutes a new service. Having a spirit use combat powers on behalf of its summoner only counts as one service, regardless of the number of foes involved.
See Critters, p. 228, for descriptions of nature spirits and their powers.
SUMMONING ELEMENTALS
Only a mage can summon an elemental. He may summon an elemental of any desired Force Rating, given the necessary equipment and time, but the mage needs a conjuring library and a hermetic circle (of the correct type) with ratings at least equal to the Force of the spirit to be summoned. The rite requires special materials, available from the local talismonger and at the cost of 1,000¥ per Force Rating Point of the elemental.
Each elemental also needs a source. Fire elementals arise from great bonfires (indoor mages, beware of sprinkler systems), a fireplace, or a large brazier. Water elementals come from a large pool or tub of water. (This requirement is satisfied if the hermetic circle is near a body of water.) Air elementals need great quantities of burning incense (watch out for smoke detectors, too). Earth elementals need a large (man-sized) heap of earth, clay, or rock. This requirement is satisfied if the place of working is on open ground.
The summoning ritual takes a number of hours equal to the elemental’s Force. At the end of this uninterrupted time the magician makes a Conjuring Test against a target number equal to the Force of the spirit. Use of a spirit focus can add extra dice to this test. Note that Magic Pool dice do NOT apply to any Conjuring-related Tests.
The number of successes from this test determines the number of services the elemental will perform for the mage. See Elemental Services, below. If the mage rolls no successes, no elemental comes, but all the materials purchased for the rite are used up. Regardless of whether the spirit comes or not, the mage must make a Drain Resistance Test of Charisma dice against a target number equal to the Force Rating of the elemental. Use of a spirit focus can add extra dice to this test. See the Conjuring Drain Table, above, to determine the Drain. Every 2 successes from the Drain Resistance Test reduce the Drain Code by one level. If Drain knocks the mage unconscious, the spirit escapes free and uncontrolled. Make a test of its Force against a Target Number 4 to determine if the elemental attacks the summoning mage. If the spirit generates at least 1 success, it realizes the opportunity it has and flees immediately. In the case of no successes, the elemental acts like the dim-brain it is and attempts to attack the summoning mage, regardless of any protection or defenses that may be present.
A mage can bind, at any one time, a number of elementals equal to his Charisma. If the mage is at the limit and wishes to conjure an additional elemental, he can release one of the currently bound ones. That spirit simply departs.
Elemental Services
An elemental that owes services to a mage is considered bound to that mage, but the mage need not use all the elemental’s services at one time. At the time of its summoning, the elemental is bound and effectively placed on notice to respond to calls from the mage. The elemental then departs, through astral space, for parts unknown. There it remains until called to serve.
To use the services of an elemental, the mage must spend a Complex Action to command the spirit to appear. The elemental then appears in its astral form, which is visible in the physical world as a slight shimmering in the air. The more powerful the spirit, the more noticeable the effect. The Force of the elemental, subtracted from 8, can be used as the Concealability for this effect. See the Concealability rules, p. 94.
The services (and therefore powers) of an elemental are not available to the mage until the spirit has been called and appears. To determine if the spirit may act during that Combat Turn, resolve its Initiative (see p. 79). If it is eligible for any Action Phases in the rest of that Combat Turn, it may act, assuming that the mage who commands it is eligible. Calling an elemental to service does not use up a service, but it is an exclusive activity so the mage cannot be sustaining any spells at the time of the calling.
An elemental stays in astral space by preference. It will only assume its manifest form if so ordered by its master. It may not be happy about having to comply, but the spirit must do so. If a period of twenty-four hours passes during which the elemental is just hanging around, or even if it is performing a service, this uses up an additional service.
With the exception of remote service (see below), the elemental must remain within line-of-sight of the mage. The use of astral senses, Clairvoyance spells, or other magical senses fulfill this requirement, but electronic viewing does not. A mage cannot “remote-control” an elemental using a trideo camera or system.
CONJURING
Through conjuring, a magician can summon, control, and banish different kinds of spirits. Though magicians and occultists are still arguing about whether spirits have a separate existence of their own or whether they spring purely from the formless energies of astral space at the time of conjuring, it does not much matter for all practical purposes.
There are many kinds of spirits, each with a Force Rating assigned by the conjuring magician. The Force Rating determines not only the spirit’s abilities, but the difficulty of handling it. The more powerful a spirit (the higher its Force), the more difficult it is to summon, control, or banish.
Two types of spirits that can be summoned with relative ease are nature spirits and elementals. Nature spirits personify the forces of the environment, and only a shaman can summon or control them.
Elementals arise from the four hermetic elements of fire, water, air, and earth, and only a mage can summon or control them. Nature spirits and elementals are described briefly below, but their full abilities and descriptions appear in the Critters section, p. 224.
Though other kinds of spirits also inhabit the Sixth World, most can only be contacted by very experienced magicians who have Karma to burn. These will be described in future Shadowrun products.
SUMMONING NATURE SPIRITS
A shaman can summon a nature spirit only in that spirit’s home domain. A domain is the environment that spirit personifies: storm spirits require open air, forest spirits heavy woods, hearth spirits an occupied home, and so on (see Domains, below). A shaman cannot summon a spirit from outside the spirit’s domain. A shaman could not, for example, summon a storm or forest spirit inside a home. A home is the domain of the hearth spirit.
The magician who summoned the elemental can order the spirit to obey another character, whether magician or mundane. Mundanes cannot use elementals to cast spells, but they otherwise receive the same services as a mage: defensive aid, sorcery, physical service, and so on. Elemental bodyguards are rare, but they do sometimes protect politicians, corporate execs, yakuza oyabun, and other big noises.
There are five types of services that an elemental can perform: aid sorcery, aid study, spell sustaining, physical service, and remote service. Each of these costs one of the elemental’s services to initiate. Sending an elemental away to wherever elementals go, and placing it on notice for calling at a later time does not cost a service. If not ordered away, an elemental will simply hang around, being noticeable in physical and astral space. (It is considered very unwise to wander about followed by a pack of elementals, unless one welcomes trouble.)
Once an elemental has been called and has arrived, it takes only a Simple Action to command it to perform a service. Elementals can only perform one service at a time.
Aid Sorcery
An elemental can give the mage extra dice for casting spells. The elemental acts like an auxiliary Magic Pool of dice the magician can use at any time until the spirit is used up and disappears. Each point of Force bestows one die. These dice do not refresh, but they may be used to augment any test at any stage in sorcery, including Spell Defense, p. 132, though they must be allocated at the same time and in the same manner as Magic Pool dice.
Each type of elemental can only help with one category of spells:
Fire elementals aid combat spells only.
Water elementals aid illusion spells only.
Air elementals aid detection spells only.
Earth elementals aid manipulation spells only.
No elemental can aid health spells.
If an elemental is used in this manner, its Force is reduced by 1 for each die used for Aid Sorcery. When the spirit’s Force is reduced to 0 through use, it vanishes. It can be called again if it is still bound. Doing so requires another Complex Action, and in this case costs one service. The elemental is, however, back at full Force Rating when it arrives.
An elemental may remain in its astral form and provide this service.
Aid Study
An elemental can provide extra dice to help its master learn new spells. For the spirit to add its Force in dice to the mage’s learning attempt costs a service. See Learning A New Spell, p. 132. The elemental can only help with a spell within its appropriate category: fire for combat, water for illusion, air for detection, and earth for manipulation. A mage may only use one spirit, one time, for learning a particular spell.
An elemental may remain in its astral form and provide this service.
Physical Service
The mage can call upon an elemental to manifest and use its powers to some end. A fire elemental could be called to burn through a door, for example, or an earth elemental to move a great weight, or any kind of elemental to fight some enemy. See the Critters chapter for a discussion of elemental powers, also the Spirit Combat section in this chapter.
Physical service always requires the elemental to assume its manifest form.
Spell Sustaining
A mage can call upon an elemental to use its Force to sustain one spell in the appropriate category. The elemental can maintain the spell for one Combat Turn for each point of Force it has. Once its Force reaches 0, it disappears. To keep the spell from vanishing with the spirit, the mage can take over the spell maintenance before the spirit goes. Spirits depleted in this manner may be re-called in a manner identical to that of aid sorcery service.
A mage can also bind an elemental to a spell to maintain it for longer periods. Doing so, however, irrevocably depletes the elemental’s Force. The elemental can maintain the spell for a number of days equal to its Force. Each day, or part thereof, that passes will permanently reduce the spirit’s Force by 1 point. When the spirit’s Force hits 0, it is destroyed and disappears, even though it may still owe additional services. The mage can release the spirit before it runs out of Force in order to end the spell ahead of schedule, but the spirit is still freed of its bond and disappears and cannot be re-called.
If a spirit is banished while sustaining a spell, the spell ends. Once an elemental has been commanded to the service of sustaining a spell, it cannot perform any other service until this service is ended.
An elemental may provide this service while in its astral form.
Remote Service
A mage can command a remote service of an elemental when it is first summoned. If the mage wishes to use the elemental for remote service, the spirit cannot be bound. Because remote service must be commanded immediately following a summoning, the command forfeits extra successes and other services. Elementals on remote service do count toward the mage’s Charisma limit.
In remote service, the mage sends the spirit off to perform a particular job such as physical service. Once it has its orders, the elemental will pursue them single-mindedly until it either accomplishes the task or is banished or destroyed. Even the summoning mage cannot halt an elemental once it has been set loose.
An elemental may perform a remote service in either manifest or astral form, and may switch between the two at will (costing a Simple Action), as needed.
SPIRIT FORMS
Nature spirits and elementals can assume either astral or manifest form. Changing between the two costs the spirit a Simple Action.
Astral Form
In astral form, the spirit exists entirely within astral space, though it may be noticeable as a slight shimmering in the air. See the preceding sections for information on noticing this effect. While in astral form, spirits can only perform services that directly affect the summoning magician or targets that have a valid astral presence (see Astral Space, p. 145). Spirit powers can “ground” like spells through the target’s physical body. See Attacking Through a Focus, p. 139, and Astral Combat, p. 147.
A spirit in astral form can communicate with its summoner, or be sensed by magicians using astral perception or projection. While the spirit is in this form, physical weapons cannot harm it. Weapon foci that have an image (an existence) in astral space can harm a spirit in astral form, but the wielder must be using astral perception or projection to use it properly. The “shimmering air effect” cannot be attacked by a weapon focus or be targeted by spells. Spirits can be attacked by banishing (again the magician must be actually seeing them) or by astral combat.
Manifest Form
Spirits assume manifest form when they must use a power against a target that has only a physical presence and is not present in astral space. Spirits dislike manifest form because it makes them vulnerable to physical attacks.
Even so, it is very difficult for non-magicians to attack and damage a manifest spirit. Only the truly courageous, driven, or mad can focus enough will to make an attack that will affect the spirit.
When attacking a spirit in manifest form using a mundane (non-magical) weapon to strike or shoot, the character uses Willpower instead of the normal Combat Skill. Against spirit foes, unshakable will is more important than weapon skill. The attacker may not add Combat or Magic Pool dice to this test. Attacks using weapon foci, other magical or spell attacks, or attacks using a spirit’s vulnerability use the proper Combat Skill dice and may be augmented by Combat Pool dice.
Additionally, manifest spirits have the power of immunity against firearm attacks, ranged (excluding bows and throwing weapons) weapons, and explosions. These are, technically, indirect attacks because they are not “powered” by the attacker and do not carry the full weight of the attacker’s will. In this circumstance, spirits have twice their Force as armor of the appropriate type (impact or ballistic). Damage is resolved normally. Spirits do not, however, have this power against melee attacks, bows (except crossbows), and throwing weapons, as there seems to be nothing to attenuate the effects of the attacker’s courage.
A spirit in manifest form can use its powers against any target in its line-of-sight. Each use is a separate service, unless it is an attack against a group of foes. Such an attack constitutes a single service, regardless of the number of foes.
Spirit Initiative
Being creatures of quicksilver and shadow, spirits move with great speed compared to bags of mud and blood like humans.
Spirits in astral form have a base Reaction as indicated for the spirit type, plus 20. They roll 1 Initiative die (1D6). Spirits in manifest form also have the base Reaction as indicated for the spirit type, but this time it is plus 10. They roll 1 Initiative die (1D6). Spirits follow the normal Combat Turn procedures and are eligible for multiple actions (see p. 79).
Spirits determine their Initiative based on the form they currently inhabit. If, sometime during the Combat Turn, a spirit in astral form changes to manifest form, it resolves the rest of its action at that time, but it is ineligible for another action for 20 Phases (the normal 10, plus the +10 Initiative bonus for astral form). Spirits in manifest form that switch to astral form receive no Initiative modifier unless they are in that form at the beginning of the next Combat Turn.
Spirits can only receive new commands on their summoner’s actions. They can Delay actions while waiting for those commands.
SPIRIT COMBAT
Spirits generally obey the same combat rules as regular characters. Individual powers will vary the number of base dice used in the attack, what the Target Number is, and whether there is a Damage or Spell Resistance Test involved. Consult the individual power descriptions in the Critters section for more information.
Spirits may also directly oppose each other. This is done as a Force against Force contest: each spirit uses its Force dice against a Target Number equal to the opposing spirit’s Force. The spirit that generates the greater number of successes reduces the other spirit’s Force by the difference in their successes.
A Force 4 fire elemental and a Force 3 water elemental are duking it out. That means a roll of 4 dice against a Target Number 3 for the fire elemental. For the water elemental, roll 3 dice against a Target Number 4.
In addition to a lot of steam, the result is that the fire elemental generates 3 successes, but the water elemental only gets 1 success. The water elemental’s Force is then reduced by 2 (3-1).
A spirit whose Force is reduced to 0 through combat is destroyed and cannot be re-called. Spirits must be within one meter of each other to fight. Direct Force against Force fights require a Complex Action from the spirit. The fight costs one service, but may be continued without additional service costs until one spirit is defeated.
Nature spirits may oppose each other within a domain. Resolution of these conflicts of powers (say, accident power against guard power) is simple: the spirit with the greater Force wins. The power takes effect at a Force Rating equal to the difference between the spirits. Ties result in no effect.
Against damage-causing powers or damage-causing weapons, the normal combat damage rules apply. Consult the Spirit Table at the end of this chapter to find the spirit’s equivalent of the appropriate attributes. Spirits have normal Condition Monitors for tracking such damage.
When attacked by a spirit, a magician has the option of using the Conjuring Skill in place of the normally appropriate resisting attribute (such as Body or Willpower). This is because the skill includes numerous traditional charms used over the centuries to turn away the malice of such beings.
CONTROL CONTESTS
Two magicians can contest control of a spirit. Only a shaman can try to take over a nature spirit; only a mage can try to take over an elemental.
The magician trying to take control declares the attempt as a Complex Action. The magician controlling the spirit may resist, regardless of whether he has actions available at that moment. The challenger makes a Conjuring Test against a target number equal to the spirit’s Force +2. The controlling magician also makes a Conjuring Test against the Force of the spirit, but with no modifiers. Both magicians may use additional dice from totem modifiers or spirit foci, though this will reduce the number of dice immediately available from the focus.
If the controlling magician rolls more successes, nothing changes, and the challenging magician must make a Drain Resistance Test as if he had actually conjured the spirit. If the challenger wins and gets control of the spirit, both magicians must make Drain Resistance Tests. If neither rolls any successes, both attempt to resist Drain, and the spirit goes uncontrolled. The Drain Resistance Test is always made as if that character had just summoned the spirit.
If the magician that won the contest is knocked out by the Drain, the spirit goes uncontrolled.
Commanding an Uncontrolled Spirit
Should a magician with Conjuring Skill encounter an uncontrolled spirit, he can attempt to gain control over it. He makes and resolves a test identical to that for banishing a spirit. (See below.) If the magician is successful, the spirit is controlled. For this test roll Conjuring dice against a target number equal to the spirit’s Force. Spirit foci and totem modifiers apply. Every 2 successes result in the spirit owing one service.
BANISHING
Banishing requires great concentration, and uses the Conjuring Skill as if the magician were casting an exclusive spell (p. 133). The magician can sustain no other spells, nor take any other actions while trying to banish a spirit. The task also requires a Complex Action.
A magician of either tradition may banish a spirit of any type. To banish a spirit, see the sequence of steps outlined below.
The process is repeated until one participant overcomes the other (dropping Force or Magic to 0), or the winner of a round decides to break off the contest. If the spirit’s Force reaches 0, it is utterly destroyed. If the magician’s Magic Rating drops to 0, the character passes out, and the spirit is free to go its way. Generally, when a spirit decides to break off a contest, it will flee. Circumstances may indicate different actions, however.
Lost rating points, Magic or Force, are regained at a rate of 1 point per hour.
A. Make Magician’s Conjuring Test
Roll Conjuring dice against a target number equal to the spirit’s Force Rating. If the magician is the one who summoned the spirit, he may add Charisma dice to this test. Spirit foci and totem modifiers apply. Count the successes.
B. Make Spirit’s Force Test
Roll Force dice against a target number equal to the magician’s Magic Rating. Count the successes.
C. Determine Effect
Compare the successes. If the spirit generates more successes, the magician’s Magic Rating is reduced by 1 for every 2 successes beyond the magician’s total successes. If the magician rolls more successes, reduce the spirit’s Force by the same ratio.
D. Continue Contest
The winner decides whether there will be another round. If so, neither combatant may do anything else until the winner’s next action: they are locked in magical combat.
ASTRAL SPACE
Astral space, or the astral plane, is a parallel dimension that coexists with the physical world. It is both the source of magical energy, and the medium through which it travels. Though astral and physical space are vastly different, the two share the common dimension of time. Everything that exists on physical Earth also has an astral counterpart, though the laws of physics do not apply to the astral plane.
Magical things (spirits, foci, spells, some magical creatures, ritual teams, magicians using astral projection or perception, and so on) are living entities in astral space. They are visible, corporeal, and capable of action while there. Beings in astral space can see physical objects and assense magical energy given off by the astral forms of all living things. Assensing is the sixth sense that allows perception of magical energy and astral forms.
Non-magical living things have a dormant astral form, an aura that is visible and corporeal in astral space but that does not act on other astral forms. The Earth is a living thing in magical terms, and thus corporeal in astral space. It is not possible to pass through things that are alive, no matter at what level, in astral space. Vegetation, for example, blocks movement just as it does in the physical world. Water, air, and fire are also tangible in astral space, but astral beings can pass through these elements because of their low density. Water and fire do no harm to the astral traveler, but do reduce the range of assensing.
Inanimate objects are visible because of reflected light, and block the passage of magical energy and emotions, two primary elements of the astral form, or aura. Because such objects block the flow of the aura, astral beings cannot assense through them. These objects possess no aura or astral form of their own, however, and so astral beings can freely pass through the astral position corresponding to the object’s physical space. In astral space, one cannot see or assense through a wall, though it is a simple matter to walk right through it. Transparent objects retain that quality, however.
Lit by radiant life energy, astral space is usually bright no matter what the time of day on the physical plane. Certain places, however, that are devoid or lacking in living material (within a bare concrete room, for example) may actually be dim or dark, imposing visibility modifiers similar to those that occur in normal visibility. See Visibility Impaired, p. 89.
Astral space pulses with the primal energies of life. Artificial symbols, objects of the intellect, are not directly perceptible in astral space. Someone examining the astral counterpart of this or any book would find that he or she could not read the words themselves, but that they could vividly sense the emotions (overwhelming, aren’t they?) of each passage. Books of poetry, for example, are rewarding when assensed astrally. Technical manuals are virtually blank. Scanning a computer screen in astral space would not reveal the informational content, but would impart the emotional context of the file—that is, whether it was public or secret data, legal or illegal, personal, technical, or business-oriented.
Neither street signs nor even maps can be read from astral space, so an astral traveler had better know where he is going before he sets out.
All things reveal their true forms and natures when viewed in astral space. Auras do not lie, and they are unique. Disguises, whether physical or magical, simply do not work astrally. A shapechanged elf retains his original aura, regardless of the final form.
ASTRAL PERCEPTION
Any magician can perceive astral space (with the exception of certain adepts), but he or she must make a Simple Action to switch from normal senses to astral senses and back again. When perceiving astrally, the magician’s senses are focused on the astral plane. Purely physical things are visible only by their astral echo, making interaction with the physical world very difficult. If an astrally perceiving magician attempts a task based solely in the physical world, an additional +2 target modifier applies to any tests.
When viewing within astral space, an astrally perceiving character can:
Assense anything that is actually there.
Assense the magical energy surrounding an item.
Assense a ritual sorcery sending.
Assense a being’s aura to determine its true nature.
The magician can assense all spirits, magical creatures, and so on, whether they are visible in the physical world or not. If the magician has a spell that affects astral space, it may be cast. See Spells and Astral Space, p. 149. The magician is also vulnerable to astral combat, p. 147.
Because the character is only perceiving astrally, he is still limited by the constraints of his body. The character can touch and be touched by other astrally active things, but he cannot reach through a wall to touch an astral object, because the physical arm cannot penetrate the physical wall, even though the astral arm has no such restrictions.
The magician can assense magical energy surrounding anything that is itself magical or that is being affected by magic: enchanted items, characters under the effect of spells, magicians casting or maintaining spells, and so forth. He can assense spells, foci, and other magical items as living beings.
The magician can detect the sending of ritual sorcery. An assensable web of energies leads back toward the source of the spell, allowing the magician to trace it using astral projection (see Astral Tracking, p. 149). Spells being sustained through ritual sorcery and spell locks also display such a trace, leading back to the spellcaster(s).
Astral perception allows the magician to view the aura of any living or magical thing, which will reveal to him the true form or nature of the being. A shapeshifter always shows its animal form in astral space, for example. A character under a disguising spell would also show his or her true form. The spell’s aura (visible independently or surrounding the thing it affects) identifies it as being of sorcery. Foci are visible as such. The auras of living beings also reveal their general state of health, wounds, diseases, active drugs in the system, and so on. The magician can also assense the Essence and Magic Attributes of living beings. The Gamemaster should not reveal actual numbers, but instead inform the magician if the score is higher, lower, or about the same in comparison to the magician’s own. The aura of a magician shows both Magic and Essence, thus revealing the magician’s nature.
The magician can gain further information about magical things by making various Tests. Sorcery Skill would divine the nature of a spell. Conjuring or Sorcery Skills, respectively, would reveal the Force and Magic Ratings of spirits or enchanted items. Use a number equal to the spell creator’s Sorcery Skill, a spirit’s Force, a magician’s Magic Attribute, or 5, if no target number can easily be determined. The number of successes controls the amount of information revealed.
The magician can make additional rolls to try to get more information, up to a maximum equal to his skill. Each additional attempt adds +2 to the target number.
The act of astrally perceiving opens the magician’s own aura to astral space, making it vulnerable to attack. As stated previously, astrally perceiving characters are vulnerable to astral combat. They can also be directly affected by mana spells, and physical spells can be cast to ground-out through them. See Spells and Astral Space, p. 149.
ASTRAL EXAMINATION
Successes	Result
0		No result; nothing learned.
1–2		The general class is learned (fire elemental, manipulation spell, combat spell focus, and so on).
3		Exact spell, spirit’s Force Rating or Focus Rating higher or lower than magician’s Magic Rating.
4+		Spell, spirit’s Force Rating or Focus Rating learned.
ASTRAL PROJECTION
The next step beyond astral perception is actual projection, in which the magician’s aura “separates” from his body and is able to move about freely and independently for some time.
Any magician can use astral projection by sinking into a trance. While in this trance, the magician’s body is dead to the world; his pulse and respiration are almost nil, and his senses are turned off. In magical terms, the magician “leaves his body” to travel in astral space. Until the aura returns, the physical body is comatose.
The magician’s astral form has Attributes based on his Attributes in the physical world, as follows:
Astral Strength is Charisma
Astral Quickness is Intelligence
Astral Body is Willpower
Astral Reaction is twice Intelligence
The magician’s Mental Attributes and Magic and Essence Ratings do not change.
The magician’s astral form appears as an idealized self-image. Of course, the idealized self-image of an ork shaman or a coldly murderous corporate hit mage can be a pretty scary assensment.
Astral images of the magician’s fetishes and magical items accompany the journey. Non-magical gear stays with the comatose body in the physical world. Simply by willing it to be so, the astral magician can form any garments or ornaments desired, but such things have no magical or armor value. It is just razzle-dazzle.
Tweezil glanced with the obnoxious pity of youth at the frail figure of his master before he entered into his own trance. As astral space enveloped him, a voice from behind boomed, “What kept you, boy?” Tweezil whirled and stared at a vibrant figure, powerfully muscled, robed in garments of light. He bore a familiar broadsword and his hands lightly held a staff Tweezil had assensed before. “B...b-boss?”
“You young snots never figure it out, do you?” the mage said with a laugh. “Over on this side, you are what you will, not what you think! Now follow me. We’ve got work to do.”
Astral Movement
Movement through the landscape of astral space proceeds at normal rate or fast rate. Normal movement is Astral Quickness multiplied by 4. This is the number of meters traveled per Action Phase. There is no danger of fatigue. Characters use this rate when they need to pay attention to the surroundings.
Fast movement is fast indeed! The magician character can move at his Magic Rating in kilometers per action (roughly Magic × 1,000 km per hour). At this speed, the magician’s surroundings are a blur. The character knows where he is and can dodge astral obstacles, but he cannot assense or see the scene in detail without slowing to normal movement. Combat can occur between two characters who are both using fast movement.
At either speed, the magician can fly, that is, can move freely to any altitude, up to the limits of the atmosphere. Do not leave the atmosphere (80 kilometers). Magicians who have tried to break this barrier have usually died or gone mad, and the memories of those who survived the journey have been badly scrambled by some kind of profound mental trauma.
Effects of Astral Projection
The longer a magician is in astral space, the weaker becomes the physical form. Because the magician has taken his Essence into astral space, the body begins to die.
The physical body loses 1 point of Essence for every hour the magician is astrally gallivanting. If the Essence falls below 0, the magician dies. The magician’s astral form has its full Essence and Magic Ratings even though the physical body is withering. Once the magician returns to the body, the Essence returns at a rate of 1 point per minute, up to the original rating.
While in astral space, the magician is unaware of the environment of his physical body unless it can be seen. If someone, or something, moves the body while the magician’s aura is gone, the magician will not know it until he comes back, to find that his physical shell is not where he left it. This sends the character on a search for his body, which he carries out by making a test of his Body or Willpower Rating, whichever is higher, against a Target Number 4. The search lasts a base time of 6 hours, divided by the number of successes. At the end of that period, assuming the magician has not run out of Essence, he will discover the location of the body. Of course, if it was enemies that moved it, the magician may find astral opponents still blocking the way back home.
A magician’s enemies could simply kill the physical body. Almost any wound to the comatose form will drive it into fatal shock. A magician in astral space knows at once if his body dies. The astral form survives until its Essence is used up, at which point it evaporates. Such a wretch may decide to spend his remaining hours seeking vengeance, and the Gamemaster can use such nobodies as ghosts.
ASTRAL COMBAT
Any magical thing or being with a presence in astral space can engage in astral combat. Things that do not have an active astral presence cannot fight or be hurt in any way in astral space. That means mundane characters (those with no Magic Rating) are immune to direct effects from astral space. It is not possible to make astral ambushes into the physical world, unless the ambusher can find some sort of bridge. See Spells and Astral Space, p. 149.
Astral combat works exactly like Melee Combat (p. 100), because the nature of astral space prevents ranged attacks. Movement, cover, and so forth have the same effect in astral space as in physical space, with the differences noted above. A magician can attack other astral forms, suffering no penalties for “movement.”
In astral space, a spell is a living thing. When viewed from astral space, the casting of a spell reveals the formation of a living shape around the caster, which charges toward the target at high speed when released. Reaching the target, it vanishes, exiting into real space, where it releases its power. Even manipulation spells that traverse the distance in normal space behave this way.
The procedure for astral combat varies slightly with each type of astral form.
Astral Initiative
Characters in astral space have a modified Astral Reaction equal to their calculated Astral Reaction +15. They roll 1 Initiative die (1D6). Characters who begin a Combat Turn in their physical bodies and then begin astral projection (a Complex Action) stay with their physical-body Initiative for the turn. If they begin the Combat Turn astrally projecting, and then return to their physical bodies (a Complex Action), they are ineligible for another action for 20 phases.
Initiative for spirits is described under Spirit Initiative, p. 142.
Characters who are only astrally perceiving (p. 145) are limited to their physical Reaction and Initiative.
Resolving Astral Combat
Magicians in astral space function with their normal Mental and Special Attributes, but have their Astral “Physical” Attributes. For all actions in astral space (dodging, fighting, reducing damage), magicians have only one dice pool, the Astral Pool, which is the equal to the sum of the magician’s Intelligence, Willpower, and Charisma, divided by 2 (round down). This Astral Combat Pool works like the physical Combat Pool in that it can be applied to astral combat, but not to the casting of magic spells in astral space. The normal Magic Pool may be applied to spells cast in astral space.
Actual attacks are like melee combat (see p. 100). If armed with an active weapon focus, the magician may attack using Armed Combat Skill. If not, he uses Unarmed Combat Skill or, alternatively, Sorcery Skill in place of either of the other two. Even characters who cannot cast spells can use Sorcery Skill for astral combat. It is for this reason that physical adepts and others study sorcery. The Target Number for an astral attack is 4. A character’s astral Damage Code is based on the nature of the attack and the attacker. See the Astral Attack Table.
ASTRAL ATTACK TABLE
Attack Type				Damage Code
Unarmed human magician		(Astral Strength)L
Armed attack (w/weapon focus)	(Astral Strength + Focus Rating/2)M
Dual-natured beings			See p. 148
Spells					(Force)Drain Level
Spirit					(Force)M
Barriers				(Rating)L
Make the Damage Resistance Test using the Astral Body Rating. Dual-natured beings (see Magical Creatures below, and Critters, p. 214) that have physical armor receive the benefits of that armor in astral space. As with normal armor, the target’s armor reduces the Power of the attack. (See Critter Statistics, p. 232, for a listing of dual-natured beings and their armor, if any.)
Astral damage can be Physical or Stun at the choice of the character inflicting it. Non-sentient astral entities such as barriers and foci always do Physical damage when attacked (they don’t know any better). Similarly, they can only be affected by Physical damage.
Note that a physical adept is able to use killing hands ability to full effect on the astral plane. Remember also that physical adepts can only astrally perceive; they cannot project.
Because of the occult phenomenon of “repercussion,” the physical body manifests the damage. That means that if a magician is wounded in astral space, the physical body is wounded at the same moment. If killed, the astral and physical bodies die at the same moment. Healing techniques used on one body also heal the other, whether the healing is magical or mundane.
Barriers
Hermetic circles and medicine lodges act as barriers in astral space. To pass through a barrier, a magician must destroy its resistance. The barrier remains intact against all other intruders. Spells cast at targets inside such barriers must penetrate the barrier before they can manage to attack their targets. The creator of the barrier will know whenever someone is attacking it.
A barrier will resist an intrusion attempt, but it will not persist in fighting an intruder who drops the attempt. To pass through the barrier the magician rolls the appropriate attack dice (Armed or Unarmed Combat or Sorcery Skill) against a target number equal to the rating of the barrier. At the same time, the Barrier’s Rating in dice is rolled against a target number equal to the Magic Rating of the magician.
If the magician rolls more successes than the barrier, the barrier is reduced by the net successes. If the barrier prevails, it causes the same damage as would an opposing magician. It has a Damage Code of (Force)L, which increases by one level for every 2 successes. The magician may resist this damage with Astral Body dice against a target number of the Barrier Rating just as for a normal Damage Resistance Test. If and when the barrier’s rating is reduced to 0, it collapses and the magician can pass through. If the fight ends prematurely, the barrier’s rating is permanently reduced.
The above applies only against attacks originating in astral space. If the attack originates in physical space, the barrier’s normal effect applies. See Manipulation Spells, p. 156.
Magical Items
Like barriers, magical items fight only if attacked.
When “destroyed,” a magical item loses its enchantment, but its physical form rarely changes. It will, however, probably show some evidence of the loss of the enchantment, such as a lessening of its quality or appearance. The item’s Force Rating serves as its attack dice in the original Success Test.
Remember, a spell lock has only a Force of 1 (the Karma spent to bond it), regardless of the power of the spell it holds. Attacks are made against the lock, not against the spell.
Magical Creatures
The two types of magical creatures are dual beings and astral beings.
Dual beings exist on both planes all the time. They have the same Attribute and Ability Ratings on both planes. Astral beings live in astral space, and most have the ability, but not the inclination, to manifest themselves in the physical world.
Dual beings must move on both planes simultaneously, as must astral beings when they manifest in the physical world. They cannot be in one place in the physical and another in astral space. Thus, they are limited to their physical-plane rate of speed and Initiative.
Combat with magical creatures follows the general rules for the environment, physical or astral, where the battle is taking place. Dual beings have the same Attributes regardless of where the fight takes place. In astral space, purely astral beings have all Attributes equal to their Force or Essence.
Ritual Teams
Magicians engaged in a ritual sorcery team are present in astral space during the sending or when they are sustaining a ritual spell. The hermetic circle or medicine lodge acts as a barrier in astral space, but all team members except the leader may sortie outside the barrier to engage astral attackers. Though they cannot cast spells from inside the barrier, they can do so freely outside the barrier. If a team member dies or loses consciousness, reduce the Magic Pool for the ritual by the appropriate amount. If this reduces the pool to 0 or if the leader loses consciousness, the ritual aborts and each remaining member of the team makes a Drain Resistance Test. Those outside the circle or lodge take the Drain as Physical damage.
Spells
A spell uses its Force Rating for all tests in any contest with a magician in astral space. Although the caster of the spell may be in the physical world, he knows the spell is being attacked. He can allocate dice from the Magic Pool and from any foci or totem modifiers he has for that spell to help the spell survive.
A spell is mindless. If unopposed, it will ignore any other astral forms and proceed to its target, arriving there in the same action as its creation. If blocked, the spell will fight. In order to intercept a spell, an astrally projecting character must be aware of the spellcasting and have a Delayed Action. An astrally perceiving character cannot move his physical form fast enough to intercept the spell.
Fighting a spell works like fighting a barrier. See Barriers, above. If the magician wins, the spell’s Force is reduced. If the spell (really the casting magician) wins, the magician takes damage based on the spell ((Force)Drain Level as the Damage Code). The winner (the intercepting magician or casting magician) then decides whether to continue. As long as one side continues the fight, the spell is “blocked” and cannot strike the target. If the attacking magician drops out, or is defeated, the spell zooms on and hits the target. If it took any damage, however, the spell’s Force is now reduced.
If a magician in astral space intercepts a spell, its caster can assist the spell, as described above. This can continue for as long as the magician desires, until the spell either wins the fight or is destroyed, which cancels it out. The magician can, on any action, decide to stop casting the spell, which will then promptly evaporate. Other spells can be cast (subject to the magic rules) while that one is being supported. This is the equivalent of sustaining a spell (+2 target modifier). The casting magician makes a Drain Resistance Test in the action the spell was cast, no matter what. If Drain or anything else knocks out the caster, the spell vanishes.
A magician in astral space cannot cast a spell at another spell, but he can cast one at any other astral being. Such a spell cannot be intercepted, and only spells that would affect the thing or being physically will work. A Sleep spell cannot be used to damage a magical item, but it would work against a magician in astral space. Mana spells only affect the astral target. Physical spells ground out and may affect others. See Spells and Astral Space, p. 149.
When a magician casts spells in astral space, Drain always causes Physical damage, regardless of the spell’s Force Rating.
Spells cast in astral space are subject to the same rules as those cast in the physical world, with a few exceptions. Only mana spells can be cast in astral space, as physical spells require a physical body to channel the energy. Mana spells affect astral targets (e.g., spirits, astrally projecting magicians) and follow standard spellcasting rules (see Casting Spells, p. 129). The magician must have line-of-sight to the target, which can be achieved through astral perception or projection.
Physical spells can “ground” through an astral form to affect a physical target, but only if the target is dual-natured (e.g., a magician astrally perceiving, a dual being like a ghoul) or connected to a physical object (e.g., a focus). When grounding, the spell’s energy transfers from astral to physical space, affecting the target as if cast physically. The spell must penetrate any astral barriers (e.g., hermetic circles, medicine lodges) before grounding, using the barrier penetration rules (see Barriers, p. 148).
For example, a magician in astral space casting a Power Bolt (a physical spell) at a dual-natured target must roll Sorcery dice against the target’s Body, penetrating any barriers. If successful, the spell grounds through the target’s physical body, dealing damage as normal. If the target is behind a barrier, add +1 to the target number per 2 points of the barrier’s Force Rating.
Drain from spells cast in astral space is always Physical damage, regardless of the spell’s Force, due to the intense strain of channeling magic without a physical body. The magician makes a Drain Resistance Test using Willpower and Magic Pool dice against the spell’s Drain Code (e.g., [(F+2)+1]S for Power Bolt).
ASTRAL TRACKING
A magician can track astral signatures left by spells, foci, spirits, or other magical entities. An astral signature is a unique magical imprint that fades over time, visible only to those using astral perception or projection. Tracking requires a Magic Test against a target number based on the signature’s age, as shown in the table below. Successes determine the accuracy and speed of the tracking.
ASTRAL TRACKING TABLE
Signature Age			Target Number
Fresh (within 1 hour)		4
1–6 hours			6
6–24 hours			8
1–7 days			10
Over 7 days			12+
The base time to track a signature is 6 hours, divided by the number of successes. For example, 3 successes reduce the time to 2 hours (6 ÷ 3). If no successes are rolled, the trail is lost, and the magician must wait 1 hour before trying again. Modifiers apply as follows:
+2 if the signature is behind a mana barrier.
+1 per 2 points of the barrier’s Force Rating.
+2 if the magician is sustaining spells.
Injury modifiers (p. 112) apply.
Tracking a ritual sorcery sending is easier, as the spell’s energy web is more pronounced. Reduce the target number by 2, and the base time is 3 hours, divided by successes. The magician can follow the web back to the ritual team’s location, provided the spell is still active or the signature hasn’t faded.
SPIRIT TABLE
The following table summarizes the attributes and Initiative for nature spirits and elementals, based on their Force Rating (F).
NATURE SPIRIT STATS
Attribute		Rating
Body			F
Quickness		F × 2
Strength		F
Charisma		F
Intelligence		F
Willpower		F
Reaction		F
Initiative (Astral)	F + 20 + 1D6
Initiative (Manifest)	F + 10 + 1D6
MANIPULATION SPELLS
Manipulation spells are, potentially, the most powerful class of spells in Shadowrun, and thousands of variations are possible. Control spells can transform or control matter and energy. Control spells can also affect the actions and the thoughts of living beings. Transformation spells change the material structure of a target. Telekinetic spells are various forms of mind over matter, from wild poltergeist phenomena to subtle work-controlling machinery.
Manipulation spells that affect characters contrary to their wishes must be resisted. Willpower is used, and the casting magician must generate an equal or greater number of successes than the target for the spell to succeed.
SPELL DIRECTORY
This directory describes the basic spells players will need to roleplay magic and magicians in the Shadowrun game universe.
The spells are presented according to type: combat, detection, health, illusion, and manipulation spells. Each spell listing is accompanied by the following notations:
Type tells the type of spell, whether Physical or Mana.
Range tells the range: Touch, Limited, or Line-of-Sight (LOS).
Target indicates how to calculate the target number for the Spell Success Test. A notation of (R) means that the spell is Resisted and so the target will roll dice to reduce the casting magician’s successes. If no (R) is present, the spell is Unresisted and only the casting magician rolls dice.
Damage indicates the base Damage Level: Light, Moderate, Serious, or Deadly, as well as whether or not the spell does Stun damage.
Duration tells whether the spell has Instant, Sustained, or Permanent duration. If Permanent has an extra notation, such as “Permanent (10 Turns),” that indicates the number of turns the spell must be sustained before it actually becomes permanent.
Drain indicates the Drain Code of the spell. The (F+2) or [(F+2)+x] notation indicates that the Drain Resistance Test is made against one-half the Force of the spell (round down), or one-half the Force plus some number. The second notation indicates whether the Drain Level is Light, Moderate, Serious, or Deadly.
A player can designate a spell as exclusive or fetish-required at the time his character chooses or learns the spell. See Creating A Character, p. 43, and Learning A New Spell, p. 132. Spells listed here are not designed with any Force modifiers.
COMBAT SPELLS
For a full discussion of Combat Spells, see Combat Spells, p. 127, Casting Spells, p. 129, and Spells and Astral Space, p. 149. Things to remember are:
Combat spells can only affect targets the magician can see.
Armor does not help in the Spell Resistance Test.
Mana spells are resisted by Willpower, and physical spells by Body.
Fireball
An area-effect spell that causes Physical damage. The fireball spell can ignite combustible materials in its blast area. Gamemaster discretion.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: Body (R)	Damage Level: S	Duration: Instant	Drain: [(F+2)+3]D
Hellblast
An area-effect spell that causes Physical damage. The hellblast spell can ignite combustible materials in its blast area. Gamemaster discretion.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: Body (R)	Damage Level: D	Duration: Instant	Drain: [(F+2)+6]D
Mana Bolt
A powerful bolt of magical energy that causes Physical damage.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: Willpower (R)	Damage Level: S	Duration: Instant	Drain: (F+2)S
Mana Dart
A small dart of magical power that does Physical damage.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: Willpower (R)	Damage Level: L	Duration: Instant	Drain: (F+2)L
Mana Missile
A bolt of magical power that causes Physical damage.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: Willpower (R)	Damage Level: M	Duration: Instant	Drain: (F+2)M
Manaball
An area-effect spell that causes Physical damage. This mana version affects only living targets.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: Willpower (R)	Damage Level: M	Duration: Instant	Drain: (F+2)S
Power Bolt
See Mana Bolt, above.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: Body (R)	Damage Level: S	Duration: Instant	Drain: [(F+2)+1]S
Power Dart
See Mana Dart, above.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: Body (R)	Damage Level: L	Duration: Instant	Drain: [(F+2)+1]L
Power Missile
See Mana Missile, above.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: Body (R)	Damage Level: M	Duration: Instant	Drain: [(F+2)+1]M
Powerball
An area-effect spell. See Manaball, above.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: Body (R)	Damage Level: M	Duration: Instant	Drain: [(F+2)+1]S
Ram
The ram spell damages inanimate targets. Successes from the casting are added to the spell’s Force, which is then compared to the target’s Barrier Rating to determine the effect. See Barriers, p. 98. Against vehicles, use the same procedure, comparing the results against the vehicle’s Body as the Barrier Rating. Each indicated reduction of the Barrier Rating does Light damage to the vehicle, but does not actually reduce the Body Rating. If vehicle armor is present, it should be added to the vehicle’s Body to determine the Barrier Rating. The target number of the spell is found on the Object Resistance Table, p. 130.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: Object Resistance Table	Damage Level: S	Duration: Instan	Drain: [(F+2)+1]S
Sleep
An area-effect spell that causes Stun damage to living targets only.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: Willpower (R)	Damage Level: M	Duration: Instant	Drain: [(F+2)-1]S
DETECTION SPELLS
Some detection spells, those called hypersense spells, give a magician new senses for as long as the spell is maintained. To determine the range at which the hypersense operates, the magician rolls Force dice against a Target Number 4. He multiplies the successes by his Magic Rating for the distance in meters at which the new sense will work. Such spells are listed as having a Limited range.
Certain detection spells, those called general, are not aimed at a specific target or targets, so it is not necessary to make a test for each of the umpty-hundred people in range of, say, a detect life spell. First, the magician declares the nature of the information sought. This sets the target number, which is 4 if the magician is exploring all targets within sight, 6 for all subjects out of sight, or 10 for beings in astral space. For subjects who are out of sight behind a magical barrier, add the Barrier Rating to the target number. The magician then makes a Success Test, rolling Force dice against that target number. See the table below for results.
DETECTION SPELL TABLE
Successes	Results
1		Only general knowledge, no details.
2		Detailed information obtained, but some details missing or inaccurate.
3		All details accurate, but minor items obscured.
4		Accurate and detailed information.
Detection spells against a specific target use the same table for determining results.
If a magician sustains a general detection spell, new subjects are picked up as they enter the area covered by the spell. The results from the original Success Test still apply.
Specific hypersense spells are good only against one target within the Limited range of the spell. A general hypersense spell touches on all targets within the Limited range.
Spells that require a voluntary subject can be cast on any willing subject.
Analyze Device
A specific hypersense spell requiring a voluntary subject. The magician can analyze the purpose and basic operation of a device or piece of equipment. The magician’s previous familiarity with the device or similar objects reduces the target number by -2. The base target number for this spell is based on the object’s resistance, see p. 130.
Type: Physical		Range: Limited	Target: Object	Duration: Sustained	Drain: [(F+2)+1]M
Analyze Truth
A hypersense spell. The magician can tell whether a target’s statement is the truth or not. The target makes a Spell Resistance Test using his Willpower Rating against the Force of the spell to reduce the spellcaster’s successes. The caster needs at least 1 success to determine validity. The spell does not work on written materials. The magician must hear a statement to know if it is true or not.
Type: Mana	Range: Limited	Target: Willpower (R)	Duration: Sustained	Drain: (F+2)S
Clairvoyance
A hypersense spell requiring a voluntary subject. The magician can see distant scenes as if present, to the range of the new sense. The magician must concentrate to use this sense, and while using it, cannot use physical vision. A magician cannot cast spells at a target seen using the clairvoyance spell. This spell does not translate sound.
Type: Mana	Range: Limited	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: (F+2)M
Clairaudience
A hypersense spell. The magician can hear distant sounds as if present, to the range of the new sense. The magician must concentrate to use this sense, and while using it, cannot use physical hearing. This spell does not translate visual images.
Type: Mana	Range: Limited	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: (F+2)M
Combat Sense
A hypersense spell requiring a voluntary subject. The subject becomes able to subconsciously analyze combat or other dangerous situations. The theory is that the spell allows precognition, with the subject sensing events a split second before they occur. Every 2 successes adds to the subject’s Combat Pool for the duration of the spell.
Type: Physical	Range: Limited	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: [(F+2)+1]S
Detect Enemies
An area-effect, general hypersense spell requiring a voluntary subject. Within range, detects living beings who have hostile intentions toward the subject of the spell. This spell would not detect a trap (it is not alive) nor a terrorist about to shoot into a crowd at random (the intention is not personal).
Type: Mana	Range: Limited	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: [(F+2)+1]M
Detect Individual
An area-effect, general hypersense spell requiring a voluntary subject. To detect the presence of a particular individual, the magician names the individual when the spell is cast. The target number is 10 minus the Essence of the target, if the target is mundane, or 10 minus the Magic Rating (or either Force or Essence, as appropriate) of the target, if the target is magically active.
Type: Mana	Range: Limited	Target: See above	Duration: Sustained	Drain: (F+2)L
Detect Life
An area-effect, general hypersense spell. The magician detects all living beings within range and knows their number and position. In a crowded area, the spell is virtually useless, picking up a blurred mass of traces. Requires a voluntary subject.
Type: Mana	Range: Limited	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: (F+2)L
Detect (Life Form)
See Detect (Object)
Type: Mana	Range: Limited	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: [(F+2)+1]L
Detect (Object)
An area-effect, general hypersense spell. The magician detects a specified type of target: detect ork, detect dragon, detect guns, detect computers, detect cameras, and so forth. Each variation is a separate spell.
Type: Physical		Range: Limited	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: [(F+2)+1]M
Mind Probe
The magician can telepathically probe a subject’s mind. The target makes a Resistance Test using his Willpower Rating against a target number equal to the Force of the spell. If the target fails to offset all the successes, the number remaining determines the extent to which the magician can probe the target’s mind. One success means that the magician can read surface thoughts. The magician knows what the target is thinking about at that instant, but cannot influence the thoughts or draw other information from the target. Two successes allow the magician to probe for thoughts. The magician can find out anything the subject knows consciously. He can ask any one question, and the target must answer with the truth as he knows it. Three or more successes allow the magician to enter the target’s subconscious, and he can obtain the answer to two questions. Additional castings of this spell against the same target within a number of hours equal to the target’s Willpower are at a +2 per attempt.
Type: Mana	Range: Touch	Target: 4 (R)	Duration: Sustained	Drain: [(F+2)+2]D
Personal Combat Sense
This personal form of the combat sense spell affects only the caster.
Type: Physical		Range: Self	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: [(F+2)+1]M
\HEALTH SPELLS
Health spells can cure diseases or inflict them, detoxify poisons or drugs, or mimic their effects, and some can temporarily modify Attributes. Many health spells are curative, healing physical damage and diseases. No techniques known to magic can erase fatigue or cure mental conditions, however.
Antidote Toxin
These curative spells act on a toxin (poison or drug) or the disease, not the person affected by them. The Spell Success Test has a target number equal to the Strength (Power) of the infection or toxin.
The antidote spell must be used before the toxin damages the victim. Its successes directly reduce the Strength of the toxin at a one-to-one ratio, making it easier for the target to make his own Resistance Tests.
Type: Physical		Range: Touch		Target: Toxin Strength
(L) Toxin	Drain: (F+2)L	Duration: Permanent (5 turns)
(M) Toxin	Drain: (F+2)M	Duration: Permanent (10 turns)
(S) Toxin	Drain: (F+2)S	Duration: Permanent (15 turns)
(D) Toxin	Drain: (F+2)D	Duration: Permanent (20 turns)
Cure Disease
The cure disease spell can be used at any point after infection, killing the germs in the patient’s system and eliminating any symptoms
HEALTH SPELLS
Health spells can cure diseases or inflict them, detoxify poisons or drugs, or mimic their effects, and some can temporarily modify Attributes. Many health spells are curative, healing physical damage and diseases. No techniques known to magic can erase fatigue or cure mental conditions, however.
Antidote Toxin
These curative spells act on a toxin (poison or drug) or the disease, not the person affected by them. The Spell Success Test has a target number equal to the Strength (Power) of the infection or toxin.
The antidote spell must be used before the toxin damages the victim. Its successes directly reduce the Strength of the toxin at a one-to-one ratio, making it easier for the target to make his own Resistance Tests.
Type: Physical		Range: Touch	Target: Toxin strength
(L) Toxin
Drain: $(f+2) L
Duration: Permanent (5 turns)
(M) Toxin
Drain: $(f+2) M
Duration: Permanent (10 turns)
(S) Toxin
Drain: $(f+2) S
Duration: Permanent (15 turns)
(D) Toxin
Drain: $(f+2) D
Duration: Permanent (20 turns)
Cure Disease
The cure disease spell can be used at any point after infection, killing the germs in the patient's system and eliminating any symptoms at once, but it does not heal damage already done by the disease. That takes a separate healing spell. Successes from the cure spell directly reduce the Virulence (Power) of the disease at a one-to-one ratio, making the target's own Resistance Tests easier.
A separate version of the spell exists for each of the Damage Levels associated with toxins and diseases.
Type: Physical		Range: Touch	Target: Virulence
(L) Disease
Drain: $(f+2) L
Duration: Permanent (5 turns)
(M) Disease
Drain: $(f+2) M
Duration: Permanent (10 turns)
(S) Disease
Drain: $(f+2) S
Duration: Permanent (15 turns)
(D) Disease
Drain: $(f+2) D
Duration: Permanent (20 turns)
Decrease (Attribute)
The magician's Target Number is 10, minus the target's Essence. The target resists using the Attribute that is attacked, not necessarily his Body Rating. The success totals of both are compared. The magician needs only 1 success to affect the target. If an Attribute is reduced to 0, the target is helpless. If this is a Physical Attribute, the victim is unconscious or paralyzed. When a Mental Attribute is reduced to 0, the victim is standing about mindlessly. A separate version of the spell exists for each of the Physical and Mental Attributes, and for Reaction, but the other Special Attributes may not be affected. These are physical spells, but will not affect targets with cyberware modifiers to their Attributes.
Type: Physical
Range: Touch
Target: 10 - Essence [R]
Duration: Sustained
Attribute -1
Drain: $[(F+2)+1] L$
Attribute -2
Drain: $[(F+2)+1] M$
Attribute -3
Drain: $[(F+2)+1] S$
Attribute -4
Drain: $[(F+2)+1] D$
Detox
Detox relieves the effects of a drug or poison. It must overcome the toxin as the antidote spell does, but because relief is symptomatic, the target number for Drain is reduced. Detox does not heal damage from toxins, but it eliminates any other effects they may have on the victim (dizziness, hallucinations, nausea, pain, and so on). Detox is the hangover cure of choice among those who can afford it. Each toxin Damage Level is a separate curative spell.
Type: Physical	Range: Touch	Target: Toxin strength
(L) Toxin
Drain: $[(F+2)-2] L
Duration: Permanent (5 turns)
(M) Toxin
Drain: $[(F+2)-2] M
Duration: Permanent (10 turns)
(S) Toxin
Drain: $[(F+2)-2] S
Duration: Permanent (15 turns)
(D) Toxin
Drain: $[(F+2)-2] D
Duration: Permanent (20 turns)
Increase Attribute
The spell increases a normal Physical or Mental Attribute and Reaction (with special modifications) but not any other Special Attributes. The target number for the Spell Success Test is equal to twice the rating of the Attribute to be increased. A single success is sufficient. This spell does not affect cybernetic features, which require the spell described next. Each Attribute has four specific spells, and so there might be a magician who knows Increase Strength +2, Increase Quickness +1, and so on.
The increase Reaction version of this spell has a Drain one level higher; $L$ becomes $M, M$ becomes $S$, and $S$ becomes $D$. There is no increase Reaction +4 spell. The increase Reaction spell only increases the Reaction Rating and gives no other benefits.
Note that this spell does not stack on top of other increase attribute spells of the same type. When cast on characters with an already magically boosted Attribute (such as a physical adept), the target number is increased by +4.
Type: Mana	Range: Touch	Target: $2 \times$ affected Attribute
Attribute +1
Drain: $[(F+2)+1] L
Duration: Sustained
Attribute +2
Drain: $[(F+2)+1] M
Duration: Sustained
Attribute +3
Drain: $[(F+2)+1] S
Duration: Sustained
Attribute +4
Drain: $[(F+2)+1] D
Duration: Sustained
MAGIC
Increase Cybered Attribute
Like the increase attribute spell described above, except that these spells increase Attributes already affected by cybernetics. Increase cybered Reaction +4 has a $[(F+2)+5] D$ code.
Type: Physical		Range: Touch	Target: $2 x$ affected Attribute
Attribute +1
Drain: $[(F+2)+3] L$
Duration: Sustained
Attribute +2
Drain: $[(F+2)+3] M$
Duration: Sustained
Attribute +3
Drain: $[(F+2)+3] S$
Duration: Sustained
Attribute +4
Drain: $[(F+2)+3] D$
Duration: Sustained
Increase Reflexes
This spell increases the Initiative dice of the voluntary subject by the amount indicated for the spell $(+1,+2$, or +3)$. There is no cybered version of this spell, so characters who have received cybernetic enhancements that add Initiative dice (e.g., wired reflexes) cannot be boosted by this spell.
Type: Mana	Range: Touch	Target: $2 \times$ Reaction
+1 Initiative Die
Drain: $(F+2) M$
Duration: Sustained
+2 Initiative Dice
Drain: $(F+2) S$
Duration: Sustained
+3 Initiative Dice
Drain: $(F+2) D$
Duration: Sustained
Treat
The treat and heal spells are both curative. Each will heal a number of boxes of damage equal to the successes rolled. The difference is that the treat spell must be applied within one hour of injury. The heal spell may be applied at any time. A character can only be magically treated or healed once for any single set of injuries.
The target number for these spells is 10 or 8 minus the target's Essence. The spell is permanent and must be maintained for the base time indicated on the Healing Table, below.
Successes from the Spell Success Test can be used to actually heal boxes of damage or used to reduce the base time, as indicated on the table. Divide the successes into the base time. The total successes can be split between the two uses (healing and time reduction), as the magician desires.
The Drain Resistance Test target number is equal to one-half the Force of the spell, and the Drain Level is equal to the current Wound Level of the target, Light, Moderate, Serious, or Deadly.
Type: Mana	Range: Touch	Target: 8 - Essence	Duration: Permanent	Drain: $(F+2)$ (Wound Level)
Heal
See Treat, above.
Type: Mana	Range: Touch	Target: 10 - Essence	Duration: Permanent	Drain: $(F+2)$ (Wound Level)
HEALING TABLE
Damage Level
Time
Deadly
20 turns
Serious
15 turns
Moderate
10 turns
Light
5 turns

ILLUSION SPELLS
No matter how realistic are illusion spells, they cannot permanently harm a character, mentally or physically. They can cause distractions, loss of balance or orientation, and even symptoms like nausea or pain. Such symptoms vanish as soon as the magician drops the illusion.
Obvious illusions are usually no more than entertainments, but a magician can use the more powerful ones to at least distract enemies, even when the opponents are aware of the illusion. Single-sense illusions seem real to only one physical sense. Fullsensory illusions seem completely real to the targets.
An illusion spell that is Resisted has an (R) added to the target number. In these cases, the target gets a Spell Resistance Test, rolling the dice indicated by the Target notation against a target number equal to the Spell Force Rating. The target's successes reduce the magician's successes, and thereby the effect of the spell.
Mana-based illusion spells are completely ineffective across technological remote-viewing systems like security cameras. A physical-based illusion spell actually bends and shapes light, and so will be effective across such systems.
Chaos
A target who fails to resist a chaos spell is subject to massive distractions. The spell consumes all senses in a cloud of blinding sights, fierce odors, and tickling sensations. A major distraction (+1 to all target numbers) is suffered for every extra success the spell has after being reduced by the Spell Resistance Test. This spell can also deceive technological sensing devices in addition to the target's own senses.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: Intelligence (R)	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] M$
Chaotic World
This is an area-effect version of the chaos spell.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: Intelligence (R)	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] S$
Confusion
This is an area-effect spell similar to the chaos spell, except that the confusion spell does not affect technological systems. Visual illusions fill the affected area, making it a place of shifting forms, dazzling lights, and pools of shadow. Those who fail to resist suffer a distraction (+1 to all target numbers) for every two successes remaining after reductions from the Spell Resistance Test.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: Willpower (R)	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $(F+2) S$
MAGIC
Entertainment
This area-effect spell requires voluntary subjects. It creates obvious, but entertaining, illusions for all who wish to watch. The number of successes measures how entertaining the audience finds the illusion.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] L$
Improved Invisibility
Like the invisibility spell, below, except that this spell affects technological sensing devices.
Type: Physical		Range: Touch	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] M$
Invisibility
The spellcaster must touch the subject, who becomes invisible to normal light. Thermographic vision can still detect body heat, and the subject is completely tangible and detectable to the senses of hearing, smell, and so forth. Double the number of successes to get the target number for an observer's Perception Test. A successful Perception Test means that the invisible person or thing has been noticed. The spell does not affect technological sensing systems (not including cybereyes which are considered natural because of the Essence Cost paid).
Type: Mana	Range: Touch	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $(F+2) M$
Mask
This spell requires that the magician touch a voluntary subject. The subject assumes some physical appearance (same basic size and shape) chosen by the caster. The number of successes becomes the target number for Perception Tests by observers. This spell does not work through technological devices.
Type: Mana	Range: Touch	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $(F+2) L$
Stimulation
The voluntary subject experiences a full sensory illusion of whatever type the spellcaster desires. This is usually a luxury spell bought by the rich and jaded, seeking sensations they cannot find in the real world. Successes measure the pleasure of the subject.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] L$
Stink
This area spell stimulates the sense of smell. Subjects within the area of effect make normal Spell Resistance Tests to reduce the magician's successes. Each remaining success increases all of the victims' target numbers by +1 because of the sickening effect of the smell's stench.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: Willpower (R)	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] S$
MANIPULATION SPELLS
Manipulation spells are, potentially, the most powerful class of spells in Shadowrun, and thousands of variations are possible. Control spells can transform or control matter and energy. Control spells can also affect the actions and the thoughts of living beings. Transformation spells change the material structure of a target. Telekinetic spells are various forms of mind over matter, from wild poltergeist phenomena to subtle work-controlling machinery.
Manipulation spells that affect characters contrary to their wishes must be resisted. Willpower is used, and the casting magician must generate an equal or greater number of successes than the target for the spell to succeed.
Control Manipulations
Control Actions
Like a puppeteer, the magician controls the physical actions of a target. The victim's consciousness is not affected, but becomes only a passenger in its own body. The victim uses any skills possessed at the magician's orders, but with +4 to all target numbers. The Threshold is the target's Willpower Rating.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: Willpower (R)	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] S$
Control Emotion
The subject feels some overwhelming emotion, which can be anything the magician chooses when the spell is cast. The spell can make the target love somebody, hate somebody, or any other single emotion desired.
The effects of this spell require roleplaying more than they do calculating scores or numbers. The spell's victims believe the emotion wholeheartedly but not mindlessly. As a rule of thumb, no penalties apply if a character is doing something that is in keeping with the emotion (fighting while filled with anger or hate). If the character is doing something that is not relevant to the emotion (trying to drive while laughing wildly), distraction modifiers apply (+2 or more to target numbers). If the character tries to go directly against the emotion (trying to shoot a "loved" target), it calls for a Willpower Test with the spell's Force as the target number. Distraction penalties apply even if the test succeeds, but it must succeed for that action to be taken.
Type: Mana	Range: LOS	Target: Willpower (R)	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] M$
MAGIC
Control Thoughts
The magician controls the thoughts of the subject. The victim will carry out orders wholeheartedly as long as the magician sustains the spell. This is the magical equivalent of deep hypnotic suggestion. Actions that would be terribly destructive to the target or his loved ones allow the character to fight the spell. He must pass a Willpower Test with a target number of the spell's Force. If the casting magician is not present, a single success will do. If the casting magician is present, roll that character's Willpower against a target number equal to the target's Willpower. The magician's successes reduce the target's. One net success on the part of the target is still all that is required to resist the heinous command.
Type: Mana	Range: Limited	Target: Willpower [R]	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] D$
Hibernate
The magician must touch a voluntary or unconscious subject. The spell puts the subject in a form of suspended animation. Double the successes from the Spell Success Test to get the factor by which bodily processes are slowed. If 4 successes are scored, the hibernate spell slows the subject's metabolism by a factor of 8. If the subject has exceeded his Condition Monitor, he or she, or it would take an extra box of damage every 80 minutes instead of 10 minutes, as described in Exceeding the Condition Monitor, p. 111. If the subject were suffering from a disease that weakened him every hour, it would now take 8 hours. If he were sealed into a chamber with only enough air to keep him alive for I day, the air would now last 8 days.
Type: Physical		Range: Touch	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $(F+2) S$
Telekinetic Manipulations
Levitate Item
Levitation allows a magician to lift an item or person from the ground and move him or it around. The maximum "distance" that the target can be moved in meters is the magician's Magic Rating times the number of successes. This distance can be expressed as vertical distance (height), horizontal distance, or any combination of the two. A magician with a distance result of 12, for example, could move an object 12 meters horizontally, or 12 meters vertically or any combination of the two, as long as the total distance (horizontal plus vertical) equalled 12. This means that 10 horizontal and 2 vertical is fine $(10+2=12)$, as is 5 horizontal and 7 vertical $(5+7=12)$. The sum of the vertical and horizontal components must equal the "distance." All movement is figured from the starting point of the target.
The magician's target number for the Spell Success Test is increased by +1 for every 100 kilograms of mass the object has. (Figure a living being has 50 kilograms per point of body, and a vehicle 1,000 kilograms.) A magician can move a levitated object anywhere as long as the spell is maintained and the target stays in view. Objects can move the full "distance" within one Action Phase.
If the spellcaster is attempting to levitate an item attached or held by a living being, that being is allowed to make a Strength Test against a target number equal to the force of the spell. Reduce the caster's successes by the successes from this test. The caster must have at least 1 net success to levitate the item away.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] L$
Levitate Person
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] M$
Magic Fingers
Magic fingers is classic telekinesis. The magician creates "invisible hands" and can hold or manipulate items by mental power. The Spell Success Test has a Target Number 6. The number of successes becomes the spell's ratings for Strength and Quickness. The character can use his own skills with the magic fingers spell, but all target numbers receive a +2 because of the problems of remote control. Even simple actions may require a Quickness Test. The magician can fight, pick a lock, or whatever, using magic fingers. The fingers can reach any point the magician can see. The casting magician can use a clairvoyance spell or even remote-viewing technology to get a close-up of the scene, as long as the actual location is within his view. The spell comes in very handy for disarming bombs.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 6	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] M$
Poltergeist
Within the area of this spell, all small objects and debris, up to a kilogram in mass, whirl around in random patterns. This reduces the visibility factor of the area (+2 to all target numbers). The spell does Stun damage as well, whacking targets with flying debris. Targets within the area use their Quickness Rating, not Body, for their Resistance Tests against such damage, with the Spell Force Rating as the target number. The Damage Category is Light. Impact armor provides protection against this damage.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 4 [R]	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] S$
MAGIC
Transformation Manipulations
Armor
A voluntary subject is required. The magician gives the subject built-in armor, knitting his tissues into tougher compounds. Treat one-half the successes made in the Spell Success Test as the Dermal Armor Rating (add to Body) for as long as the spell is maintained.
Type: Physical		Range: Limited	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] M$
Barrier
Barrier is an area-effect spell in which the magician forms a force field of crackling energy. The Spell Success Test has a Target Number 6. The magician may form the barrier as a normal area spell, which would create a dome of energy, or he may create a wall. The wall's height is the spell's force in meters. The length of the wall or radius of the dome is equal to the magician's Magic Rating. This length may be adjusted in the same way as the radius of an area effect, by withholding dice from the Success Test. The magician may make the wall into any shape. Anything the size of a molecule (or less) can pass the barrier, including air or other gases. Anything bigger treats a physical barrier as having a Barrier Rating equal to the spell's force (and is therefore cumulative with armor). Attacks directed through a barrier spell have a visibility modifier of -1. Physical barriers do not impede spells, even manipulation spells.
Type: Physical		Range: Limited	Target: 6	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] S$
Mana Barrier
Mana barriers do not stop physical weapons, but they do block movement by living beings. Unliving things (like bullets) pass right through. Passengers inside closed vehicles are not affected by a mana barrier spell, but it would knock the rider off a motorcycle. A mana barrier spell also acts as a defense against spells. Add one-half the spell's Force (the barrier's Rating) to the target numbers of all magicians casting spells across the barrier. It is also an astral barrier.
Type: Mana	Range: Limited	Target: 6	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] S$
Ignite
The magician accelerates molecular speed in a target, making it catch fire. Anything that can burn is subject to this spell. The base time to ignite the target is 10 turns, divided by the magician's successes. Once the target ignites, it is burning until it either burns up or is extinguished by smothering, water, or a fire extinguisher. The spell must generate more successes than the Body Rating of living targets or the base Barrier Rating of inanimate objects. The ignite spell wraps a being in flames, causing (F)M damage on the first turn. The Power increases by 1 point per Combat Turn. At the end of each turn, make a Damage Resistance Test, counting one-half impact armor. Ammo or explosives carried by the victim may go off. If flames are not extinguished, they burn out in 1D6 Combat Turns.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Permanent	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] D$
Flame Bomb
This area-effect spell creates a blast whose effects surround the target. Being of real flame, it causes easily flammable materials to ignite and burn. The Damage Code for this attack is (F)M. Every 2 successes increases the damage by one level. The spell is resisted by Body, and one-half the value of Impact Armor reduces the Power (Force) of the attack. Resolve using the ranged combat procedure.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Instant	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] D$
Flamethrower
This spell creates a stream of flame from the caster to the target. Being of real flame, it causes easily flammable materials to ignite and burn. The Damage Code for this attack is (F)M. Every 2 successes increase the Damage Code by one level. The spell is resisted by Body, and one-half the value of Impact Armor reduces the Power (Force) of the attack. Resolve using the ranged combat procedure.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Instant	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] S$
Ice Sheet
This spell creates a flat sheet of ice that covers a number of square meters equal to the caster's Magic Rating multiplied by the successes. Characters crossing the sheet must make a Quickness Test against a Target Number 3 to avoid falling prone. Vehicles must make a Handling Test to avoid having to make a Crash Test. The sheet melts at a rate of 1 square meters per minute.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Instant	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] S$
Light
An area-effect spell. This spell creates a mobile point of light that illuminates an area equal to the magician's Magic Rating times the spell's successes in meters. The illumination is roughly equal to that from a good flashlight, but as an area-effect. This spell cannot be used to blind, but does offset visibility modifiers for darkness: 2 successes counters a +1 modifier.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] M$
Shadow
An area-effect spell. This spell creates a pool of darkness equal to one-half the caster's Magic Rating times the spell's successes in meters. The target number depends on the local conditions: bright midday, 6; day, 5; day, overcast, 4; twilight, 3; street light or darker, 2. Every 2 successes imposes a +1 target modifier for Combat or Perception Tests against targets within the area of shadow.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: See above	Duration: Sustained	Drain: $[(F+2)+2] M$
Spark
This spell creates a small spark of electricity that springs from the spellcaster to the target. The damage code for this attack is (F)M. Every 2 successes increase the Damage Code by one level. The spell is resisted by Body, and one-half the value of impact Armor reduces the Power (Force) of the attack. Resolve using the ranged combat procedure.
Type: Physical		Range: LOS	Target: 4	Duration: Instant	Drain: $[(F+2)+1] M$
GAMEMASTER ADVICE
Never new. Your run might be over, but someone, some­where. Is just starting his, and the target could be you. -Kirk Hoff, street mage 

This section Is primarily the domain of the gamemaster, though players will also find It helpful to read. As with all the Shadowrun rules. These are primarily gUidelines. If players and the gamemaster do not agree with the working of a particular rule. or more important. how It feels, they are free to change it. No one is going to come by their house late one night to find out If they are playing by the published rules. We stopped doing that years ago. 
DICEY SITUATIONS 
As an adventure unfolds, players are going to want to use the skills and Attributes of their characters to get things done: con their way past a guard, fix a broken detonator before the trolls find their hiding place, or try to understand what that corp-type who speaks only Japanese is saying to them. The gamemaster, meanwhile, will want to know whether the player characters saw that all-important due or whether they inadvertently kicked it under the trash. 
for many of these situations, gamemasters will have to rely on their own judgment to decide which skills are needed for the situation, to determine the target numbers and situation modifiers. and to interpret what a H success~ means. The follOWing gUidelines and rules will help resolve some of the more common situations. 

USING SOCIAL SKILLS 
To influence a group of NPCs who have no designated leader, use the average of their ratings. Groups tend to react as a whole, the reluctant members being drawn along by the enthusiastic ones. Otherwise, simply make all attempts against the leader of the pack (varooom).
The base target number is modified by circumstances according to the Social Skill Modifiers Table, below.
Social Skills offer a prime opportunity to use extra successes as a measure of accomplishment. Judge the exact effects according to the specific circumstance.
SOCIAL SKILL TABLE
Situation Target Modifier
With respect to the character, the NPC is:
Friendly
-2
Neutral
+0
Hostile
+4
An enemy
+6
Suspicious
+2

Player's desired result is:
Advantageous to NPC
-2
Of no value to NPC
+0
Annoying to NPC
+2
Harmful to NPC
+4
Disastrous to NPC
+6

Dodger wants to do some snooping at a local Mitsuhama subsidiary. To get in, the elf tries, with a little fast talk and a somewhat tattered ID card, to negotiate his way past the gate guard. Dodger has a Negotiation Skill Rating of 4. The elf uses the other chummer's Mental Attribute as his target number, in this case, the guard's Intelligence of 3. The guard is suspicious (+2, it's his job to be suspicious) and will be in trouble if he allows unauthorized personnel into the compound (harmful to him, +4), but the elf's got an ID card (the gamemaster awards a special -1 for supporting evidence). That brings the target number to $3+2+4-1$, or 8.
Because of Dodger's Negotiation Skill of 4, he rolls 4 dice and gets 6, 6, 6, and 4 (lucky pixie). The elf's got a good line tonight. He re-rolls the three sixes and gets 2, 3, and 5. Adding each result to 6, he gets a final result of 8, 9, and 11, for a total of 3 successes. One would be enough to get him past the guard, temporarily convincing the poor fool that Dodger really is a Mitsuhama employee. That wouldn't last long, though, because the guard is no idiot. Unless distracted, he would begin to notice holes in the elf's story. Because Dodger has 3 successes, the guard is convinced enough to wait until the end of his shift before checking his log book to see whether the ID was valid (and because it wasn't, setting off alarms). If the elf had been skillful enough to get 5 successes, the guard might never have twigged to the deception and might not even have logged in Dodger's presence.
RACISM AND CHARISMA
Charisma is the gut-reaction Attribute. It influences an NPC's reaction to a character before any words are spoken or actions taken. It is a reaction that comes with a character's first glance across a crowded room, out on the street, or in a dark alley.
Before a character can interact with an NPC, the gamemaster must determine whether or not the NPC is racist. To find out, roll 2D6 and subtract 6. If the result is a positive number, then yes, the NPC is racist. The number itself determines how racist the NPC is, in effect creating Racism Points. (A roll of 9 gives a result of 3, meaning the NPC has 3 Racism Points). Next, determine where the NPC's bias lies. Roll 1D6 and consult the following table.
RACISM TABLE
Dice Result
Racial Bias
1
All, except own race
2
Humans
3
Elves
4
Dwarfs
5
Orks
6
Trolls

If the result is the NPC's own race, ignore that result and continue to roll 2D6 until two racial biases are indicated, or the result is all races.
An NPC with Racism of 3 against orks would have that listed as Racism (Orks) +3 in the Notes section of the Character Record Sheet.
This information modifies the Interaction numbers between a character and an NPC in the following manner. When making a Social Skill Test, as described in the previous section, add any Racism Points the NPC harbors against the character's racial type to the Social Skill target number. The character can offset these points by making a Charisma Test against a target number (known only to the gamemaster) equal to twice the NPC's racism. Each success generated counteracts 1 point of racism. Successes from this test do not directly help the Social Skill Test; they are only used to offset Racism Points.
If the character is defaulting to Charisma for the Social Skill Test, he may not make a separate Charisma Test to offset racism.
USING BUILD/REPAIR SKILLS
Characters performing a Build or Repair task are primarily interested in how long it takes. A very successful character can reduce that time. Divide the time specified for the operation by the number of successes achieved to determine the total time required.
As a guideline to the time required to build things, find the price of a comparable item on the Equipment Table, p. 254, and divide that figure by one of the following numbers to get the typical time in hours. Divide by 10 for armed-combat type items, by 20 for vehicles, and by 50 for electronics, cyberware, or other technical gear. Ordinary, everyday equipment would have a Target Number 4. Fancy or technical stuff gets a 6. The real exotics start at 8.
The following skills and skill groupings have corresponding Build/Repair Skills or are Build/Repair Skills themselves: Aircraft, Armed Combat, Biotech, Boats, Computer, Demolition, Electronics, Firearms, Ground Vehicles, Gunnery, Projectile Weapons, Throwing Weapons.
BUILD/REPAIR TABLE
Situation
Working Conditions:
Target Number
Bad
+2
Terrible
+4
Superior
-1


Tools are:
Target Number
Unavailable
Usually not allowed
Inadequate
+2


Reference material available
0
Working from memory
+(5 - Intelligence)

Dodger's sweating hard, but he can't feel it under the water from the sprinkler system as he fumbles with the soldering iron and probes (Inadequate tools, +2) he scrounged up. He wishes Grinder hadn't blasted the door lock to keep the corp cops from coming through it behind them. The runners need to go through it now, before the whole place blows up in their faces. Between the sprinkler system and the stress, the gamemaster decides that Dodger is working in terrible conditions, and the water from the sprinklers splashing on the circuits does not help one bit (+4). To override a door control without a lock would normally be a typical task (Target Number 4). Dodger faces a Target Number of $4+2+4$, or 10. He has Electronic Skill of 4, and so he rolls 4 dice for this test. The results are a 3, 4, 5, and 6. The re-rolled 6 yields a 5, for a total of 11, and Dodger breathes a sigh of relief.
VEHICLE OPERATION SKILL
Normal vehicle operation does not require any dice rolls. Unless things are really bad, most people can safely operate a vehicle for which they are trained without any problems. Unfortunately, shadowrunners are not most people. They ask their vehicles to do things that would make the most hardened driver's ed teacher drop dead. When those situations come up, the gamemaster can use the Handling Rating of the vehicle as a target number and apply the following situation modifiers.
These modifiers apply only to non-combat situations.
VEHICLE OPERATION TABLE
Situation
Target Number Modifier
Complex controls
+1
Unfamiliar vehicle


  Nonstressful situation
+1
  Stressful situation
+3
Large vehicle of type
+2
Very large vehicle of type
+3
Bad conditions
+2
Terrible conditions
+4
Rigger in control
-(VCR Level × 2)

Whiz Kid's a rigger. He's also into aircraft, helos to be exact. He's got Rotor Skill of 6. Being a rigger, he has concentrated on Remote Operation and specialized in Fixed-rotor. He can operate any fixed-rotor aircraft, remotely or jacked in, at a rating of 8.
Whiz Kid's Ares Dragon has hit a sudden squall and he decides to land before it gets worse. The chopper is big (+2) and the squall makes for bad conditions (+2). With his Vehicle Control Rig Rating of 1 he gets a -2. Too bad he's never flown a Dragon before (+1), but least he's not under fire. His target number is the Dragon's Handling Rating of 5, plus the modifiers, for a final Target Number of 8. Whiz Kid rolls aក
System: * Whiz Kid rolls a 1, 2, 3, 3, 5, 6, 6, and 6. Re-rolling the three sixes, he gets 1, 1, and 4, for a final result of 1, 2, 3, 3, 5, 7, 7, and 10. The last 1 saves his butt because it gives him one success. The Dragon sets down safely.
USING KNOWLEDGE SKILLS
Does the player know the capital of Tir Tairngire? What about the metals that make up orichalcum? What are the normal operating parameters of a smartlink and why does this chipped ork, who the player just offed, have something that seems to work differently? Players may not know this information, but their characters might. Below is a list of suggested target numbers and a Success Table for using the various Knowledge Skills.
KNOWLEDGE SKILL TABLE
Target Number
Character is seeking:
Target Number
General knowledge
3
Detailed knowledge
5
Intricate knowledge
8
Obscure knowledge
12

Number of Successes | Result
1
General knowledge, no details
2
Detailed information, with some minor points inaccurate
3
Detailed information, with some minor points obscure or missing
4
Detailed and accurate information

Fastjack has never had much use for magic, but he knows science (Physical Sciences Skill 6). He got his hands on a strange, white rock and he wants to know what it is. The gamemaster, who knows that the object is a piece of metamorphosed flesh, secretly sets the Target Number at 12 because the rock is not natural and because magical workings are not common knowledge, especially to Fastjack. Fastjack rolls his dice and manages to get 2 successes, which is not enough to learn the whole story. The gamemaster informs Jack that his analysis tells him that the rock is a metamorphic carbonate of unusual structure, possibly a fossil, because of the presence of some apparently biological structures.
USING LANGUAGE SKILLS
When using languages, failure to achieve the required number of successes usually means that the attempted communication was only partially successful, and possibly misunderstood, to the character's detriment. The gamemaster may want to make any required die rolls himself, so that the players will not know whether or not what they intended to say got across.
LANGUAGE SKILLS TABLE
Situation
Situation
Target Number
Speaking dialect (variation of a particular language)
+2
Universal concept (hunger, fear, bodily functions)
2
Basic conversation (concerns of daily life)
4
Complex subject (special/limited interest topics)
6
Intricate subject (almost any technical subject)
9
Obscure subject (deeply technical/rare knowledge)
11

A beautiful elven woman comes running up to Dodger, bubbling something in Elvish. His knowledge of the language is minimal (Elvish 2). He rolls his 2 dice and gets two sixes. As it turns out, these are successes, and so he understands that she is looking for help because someone is following her (Complex Subject, Target Number 6). When she tries to explain just who it is and why they want her (Intricate Subject, Target Number 8), the convolutions become too much for Dodger (he rolls a 2 and a 5) and he loses the sense of what she is saying. Still, she is a maiden in distress, and he must help her!
USING EQUIPMENT
As listed in the Equipment Table, p. 254, most Shadowrun equipment carries a rating, but the ratings are generally unimportant. The equipment does what it does, unless some other piece of equipment opposes it. A good example of this action-counteraction is a radio transmitter and a jammer. As long as the radio transmission is unopposed, it works fine and no tests are necessary. If a jammer is also being operated, the equipment must also make a test to see whether it overcomes the transmitter. Each piece of equipment uses its own rating for the number of dice to roll, and the rating of the opposing piece of equipment as the target number. Ties have no result; the device that was activated first remains active. This equipment rating is the item's ECM/ECCM (electronic countermeasures/electronic counter-countermeasures) Rating.
Equipment that does not normally have such a rating (like cyberware radios) can be upgraded to include rating points of ECM/ECCM. Simply multiply the list cost by the ECM/ECCM Rating installed. Use this rating for any tests the gamemaster must make for the equipment.
Equipment listed with a base cost in nuyen are assumed to have an ECM/ECCM Rating of 1. If the purchaser wishes to acquire the piece of equipment at Rating 0 (no ECM/ECCM, and opposing equipment automatically dominates), then multiply the base cost by .75.
Items acquired at a higher than ECM/ECCM Rating 1 add that value to the Availability of the item (see below).
Availability
Availability determines how easy it is to acquire a particular item, and how long it takes to do so. Associated with Availability is the Street Index, which affects the price of the item if purchased through the shadow or gray markets.
Both numbers are intended as guidelines for the gamemaster, who should make adjustments to these values based on the particular campaign and the specifics of the situation.
When a character wishes to purchase something that is legal and generally available, he can do so, unless the gamemaster has some reason for wishing to limit access to that item. Some legal items have Availability Codes that reflect their limited supply but that do not necessarily imply that these items must be purchased through "other means."
To obtain the desired item, the character contacts the source, usually a fixer, though this may vary (a Mr. Johnson, for instance, might have access to a piece of relevant technology). For this Acquisition Test, the gamemaster rolls a number of dice equal to either the source's relevant Special Skill (such as the fixer contact's "Equipment Acquisition" Skill) or the standard Etiquette Skill (Street, Corporate, and so on), adding +2, against the first value of the Availability Code, which serves as the target number. For certain items, especially those with a variable rating, the gamemaster may wish to increase the Acquisition target number by 1 for every 2 rating points of the item.
Divide the resulting number of successes from this roll into the base time it takes to obtain the item, which is the second part of the Availability Code (to the right of the slash). This part of the code appears in hours ("hrs"), days, and months ("mths"). The base time divided by the number of successes achieved provides the actual time it takes for the source to locate the item. Halfway through this period, the source actually finds out that the item is available and contacts the buyer. If the gamemaster (the source) rolls no successes, the item is not available at this time.
When the source contacts the buyer, a Negotiation Test should be made. The character rolls his Negotiation Skill dice (or Charisma or related Skill Web default) against a target number equal to the source's Willpower Rating. The source does the same, using the character's Willpower Rating as its target number. The price of the item is equal to the Cost multiplied by the Street Index. Whoever generates the most successes (source or buyer) may adjust the price in their favor by 5 percent for every success they rolled above the opposition's success total.
If the buyer cannot, or will not, pay the resulting price, the deal is off. If the buyer agrees to pay, the item shows up at the time indicated and a meet is arranged to exchange the item for the money.
If a piece of equipment with an ECM/ECCM Rating greater than 1 is being purchased, the Availability of that item should be increased appropriately, and the Street Index increased by .1 per rating point.
HAULING THE LOAD
Players have a tendency to equip their characters with every conceivable item, from assault cannons to toasters, along with enough ammunition and bread to keep them operating continuously for five years. If the players' equipment seems to be getting a bit out of hand, the gamemaster can impose the following Encumbrance rules.
A character can carry up to his Strength × 5 in kilograms without appreciable effect.
Twice that load (Strength × 10 kg) will leave the character in a state equivalent to Lightly Wounded on the Stun Condition Monitor (see p. 111).
A character carrying three times the load (Strength × 15 kg) is Moderately fatigued, cannot run, and his movement is cut in half.
Four times the load (Strength × 20 kg) makes the character Seriously fatigued, he cannot run, and his movement is cut to one-quarter the normal rate. Any heavier load makes the character pass out from exertion.
If the character is only trying to lift a load, but not carry it, he may add (Strength)D6 kilograms to his maximum load (Strength × 20 kg). A character can only hold this weight for a number of turns equal to his Body, however. Any longer increases the character's Stun Condition Level by one level per turn.
PERCEPTION
The gamemaster usually keeps the player informed of obvious information about the character's surroundings. But what about the not-so-obvious information? Like whether or not that corp-type suit over there is packing heat. Or whether the character can hear that sneaky elf coming up the alley behind him. Or smell the chromed ork hiding under an invisibility spell.
To determine what a character is aware of in such situations, the gamemaster tests the character's perception. He uses the character's Intelligence Rating for the number of dice to roll; the target number will depend on the circumstances.
An individual making a Perception Test should roll the dice as described above. The gamemaster may want to make one Perception Test for the entire team, but this should not be done when surprise is possible (as described on p. 86 of Combat). For a group Perception Test, find the average Intelligence Rating for the team and roll that many dice plus an additional die for each member of the team.
A Perception Test can be made for any situation that involves one of the five senses: sight, hearing, smell, touch, and taste. Set the base Target Number at 4 and use the Perception Test Modifiers Table to determine appropriate modifiers. The table is not meant to cover every situation, but merely to offer some guidelines.
Some things, like the Concealability of guns, have specific numbers assigned to them, as listed in the Equipment Table in the Gear section of the rules, p. 254. The Perception Test should be made against that number.
A single success indicates that someone has noticed something. Consult the Perception Success Table to determine other levels of success.
PERCEPTION TEST MODIFIERS TABLE
Situation
Modifier
Perceiver is distracted
+2
Sight


Very small object
+6
Object partially hidden
+2
Object brightly colored
-2
Action very obvious
-4
Action not obvious
+4
Visibility modifiers
see Visibility Table, p. 89, Combat
Sound


Single gunshot
-2
Silenced single gunshot
0
Burst fire
-4
Sound-suppressed burst fire
-2
Full autofire
-6
Sound-suppressed autofire
-4
Grenade blast
-8
A person's yell
-2
Sound is rooms away
+2
Sound is on same floor
+4
Sound is floors away
+6
Perceiver has active sound enhancements
Rating, or -2
Smell


Odor obvious
-4
Other odors present
+2
Touch


Temperature extreme (hot or cold)
-4
Perceiver wearing gloves
+2
Taste


Taste obvious
-4
Perceiver has a cold
+2

PERCEPTION SUCCESS TABLE
Successes | Resulting Perception
1
That something is there, but little else.
2
Something is definitely there, and the perceiver knows where.
3
The perceiver knows what kind of thing it is, and suspects its exact nature.
4
The perceiver knows what it is, but has no specifics without further information or examination.

DISEASES AND TOXINS
Toxins (drugs and poisons) and diseases can do damage from which a character may recover normally. Many also have side effects that affect the character as long as the nasty stuff is active. As the disease or toxin runs its course through the character's body, some of these side effects may only manifest at certain stages.
Countermeasures to toxins and diseases are called antidotes. These will increase the victim's dice by their rating for the Body Test if no damage has yet been done. If the patient has gone down (Deadly Damage Level) from the effects of a nasty, the injection of the correct antidote counts as professional attention. See Deadly Wounds and First Aid, p. 115.
Many vaccines can be administered before a character is exposed to a disease or drug. These provide immunity to the toxin, and so the character is not required to resist the damage at all.
Diseases and toxins are rated for the damage they do and the speed with which they take effect.
The speed factor determines how soon after exposure the victim will have to resist damage. For toxins, this is usually immediately, but the time period can be hours or even days for diseases. The victim must use a Body Test to resist again if that time period elapses again and he is still in contact with the toxin, or still infected by the disease. Some kind of technological or medical attention must be given during this period.
The description of the disease or toxin will specify any side effects or symptoms and include notes about how the nasty stuff gets into the victim's system and any special treatments that might be necessary.
To resist diseases and toxins requires making a Body Test using the Power of the attack as the target number. Every 2 successes reduces the Damage Level.
Toxins
Neuro-stun VIII
Damage: 6S Stun
Speed: 1 turn
Description: Delivered as a gas in an organic binder, N-S VIII takes effect if inhaled, or on contact with the skin. At the end of the turn during which a character is exposed to N-S VIII, he suffers Stun damage. Even if he resists this, he suffers disorientation for about an hour, adding +2 to all target numbers.
Narcoject
Damage: 6D Stun
Speed: Instantaneous
Description: Injected. Can be used in drug darts, because a touch is sufficient to inject. No side effects.
Fugu-5
Damage: 3D
Speed: Instantaneous
Description: Injected or eaten. This is a hyped-up version of one of the deadliest neurotoxins in nature. No side effects if the character resists.
Diseases
VITAS-3
Damage: 6D
Speed: 12 hours
Description: Aerosol virus transmitted by close contact or by infected person sharing confined space with another person. After the incubation period, fever, chills, and vomiting occur until damage is reduced to Light.
NON-PLAYER CHARACTERS
The gamemaster can use the various archetypes and contacts provided in this book for the non-player characters (NPCs) with whom the player characters interact during the course of the game. Often, the game statistics presented for the archetype or contact will work as published and require no modification. Most times, however, the stats will need modification to better suit the particular character or situation.
The system provided for creating a character, p. 40, is not the best way to generate an appropriate NPC. That system is designed to create starting player characters, not non-player characters of varying experience levels. The main difference is that NPCs need not be balanced to anything beyond the gamemaster's needs for the story. The attributes, skills, abilities, and gear of the NPC should be tailored to the story, not to a creation system.
If a gamemaster would like to use a system to create experienced NPCs, the following formula may be helpful: Use the character creation system provided, but for every two years of experience the NPC has, increase the Attribute, Skill, or Resource values by 10 percent. For non-player characters that have been around the block more than a few times (in the biz longer than 10 years), increase the values by 10 percent for every 4 years beyond 10. The appropriate values of a
System: * The appropriate values of a character in the business for 25 years would increase by 50 percent for the first 10 years, and then another 30 percent for the next 15 years (not quite 16 years, so not 40 percent), for a cumulative 80 percent increase.
THREAT RATINGS
Threat Ratings are a simple way to increase an NPC's toughness without going through extensive character-creation back-flips. Each point of Threat Rating gives the NPC an extra die for any tests, offensive or defensive. Threat Rating dice are not the same as a Dice Pool; Threat dice are always available and need not refresh. A number of dice equal to the Threat Rating is available for multiple tests within a Combat Phase. If using Threat Ratings, do not use standard Dice Pools for that non-player character.
No clear-cut way exists to determine the amount of Threat Rating an NPC should have, as Shadowrun offers no easy means to determine the relative toughness of characters. The two possible angles of attack are:
Base the Threat Rating on the Skill Success Table, p. 68 of the Skills. Use the adjective in the first column (Difficulty) to describe the NPC's "threat level," then use the target number from the second column as the Threat Rating.
Give the NPC a Threat Rating related to the team's total Team Karma (see Karma, p. 190), at a ratio of 1 point of Threat Rating per 100 Karma points earned, for example.
Each gamemaster will probably need to experiment to find the most effective way to assign Threat Ratings.
The Threat Rating is not added to Initiative dice for the purpose of determining the NPC's Initiative. Use the standard Reaction plus Initiative dice formula.
Threat Rating dice should be treated as Combat Pool dice for determining a clean miss. See Combat Pool, p. 84.
NPC ACTIONS
Non-player characters are rated by their professionalism and how well their courage holds up under fire. NPCs can be rated as Average, Semi-Trained, Trained, and Professional. The NPC's Professionalism Rating determines how long after he is injured a character will remain in a fight. The gamemaster should take the NPC's level of professionalism into consideration when that character gets into a fight, but should never feel constrained by it.
Average Non-Player Characters (Rating 1)
Average NPCs are untrained and unfamiliar with combat situations. They tend to react poorly, slowly, and without a plan. Examples of non-player character types with a Professionalism Rating of Average are pedestrians, wage slaves, and so on.
Average NPCs will withdraw from a fight or else stop fighting immediately after they receive a Light wound. The gamemaster may choose to make a Willpower (4) Test for the character to determine whether or not he is able to steel his will and remain in the fight.
Semi-Trained Non-Player Characters (Rating 2)
Semi-trained characters have some training and/or combat experience. They will remain in a fight until the situation is obviously no longer going their way. They tend to act in a deliberate manner and with a plan, but do not have the cool head of the true professional. Some examples of character types with a Professionalism Rating of Semi-Trained are street cops, low-ranking corporate security guards, and the like.
Semi-trained characters will withdraw from a fight or else stop fighting immediately after they receive a Moderate wound. The gamemaster may choose to make a Willpower (4) Test to determine whether or not the character is able to steel his will and remain in the fight.
Trained Non-Player Characters (Rating 3)
Trained characters have received special combat training and, in general, know what they are doing. They are not stupid and will not take foolish chances. Some examples of character types with a Professionalism Rating of Trained are bodyguards, mercenaries, ranking or experienced street cops, corporate security guards, and so on.
Trained characters will withdraw from a fight or else stop fighting immediately after they receive a Serious wound. The gamemaster may choose to make a Willpower (4) Test to determine whether or not the character is able to steel his will and remain in the fight.
Professional Non-Player Characters (Rating 4)
Professional non-player characters live for combat. They will remain in a fight till the bitter end, or until personal motivation dictates otherwise. Examples of character types with a Professional Rating are any shadowrunner, elite law enforcement or security characters, or important non-player characters (gamemaster judgment).
FENCING THE LOOT
A character's got an optical chip full of hot data, fresh off some corp's database. As an added bonus, the character nailed some exec's limo, and has the ordinance from half a squad of bodyguards in the trunk. How does he get rid of it all?
If the team has a prearranged deal for disposing of loot, then ignore these rules. If they have a pile of stuff and nowhere to sell it, then it's time to find a fence. The fence could easily be one of their regular street contacts, like a fixer or a talismonger, depending on what the runners have to sell.
FINDING A FENCE
Finding a fence requires a successful Etiquette (Street) Test. The base Target Number is 4, modified per the situations on the Finding a Fence Table.
FINDING A FENCE TABLE
Situation
Modifier
Using a regular contact
-2
Disposing of standard gear
-1
Disposing of hi-tech or other important loot
+2
Disposing of hot loot
+4
While being sought by police
+2
While being sought by a corp or organized crime
+2
Magical loot (foci, spell formulae, and so on)
+2

THE LOOT
Most fences will buy loot that is easy to dispose of before taking on the fancy stuff. A fence typically prefers to buy in the following order:
Standard gear, including weapons, clothing, armor, vehicles, jewelry, credit balances (money), and so forth.
Hi-tech loot, including ordinary data, equipment, research files, and such.
Hot loot, including unique items, specific datafiles, prototypes, procedurals for new processes, magical items, or anything that belonged to a big, big Pollock and is irreplaceable.
If a team is working together to find a fence, roll a number of dice equal to the average Etiquette (Street) Rating for the group looking for the fence plus 1 die for each member against the modified target number (determined by adding or subtracting the situation modifier from the Finding a Fence Table to the base Target Number of 4). All the characters who contribute their Etiquette (Street) Rating to the total must attend the meeting at which the loot will be sold. If one or more of them cannot show, the fence will get nervous and skip the meet.
Successes achieved on the roll to find a fence can be used in two ways.
Hustle it Along
It takes a base time of 10 days to locate a fence and set up a meet. Characters may allocate successes to reduce this time (to a minimum of 1 day). Each day spent looking for a fence increases the chances that the former owners of the merchandise will learn that the player characters are trying to move it. At the end of each day, the gamemaster rolls a number of dice equal to the days spent searching against a Target Number of 6. Even 1 success means the bad guys are on to them. If the gamemaster thinks the bad guys would hunt down the team, he can set up an ambush at the meet.
Financing the Fence
Fences have limited means; they are just ordinary businessmen, trying to turn a dishonest nuyen. Instead of using their successes to reduce the time required to find a fence, the team can allocate successes to increase the fence's bankroll. The gamemaster secretly rolls 2 dice and multiplies the result by 100,000¥ to determine the base bankroll. He then multiplies the base amount by the number of successes the team allocates to the fence's bankroll to get the total amount of money the fence will have available for their meet. Of course, this total does not represent the amount of money the fence is going to spend, just how much he has available.
THE MEET
A meet can take place anywhere. Once the meet is in progress, make a Negotiation Test between any one character and the fence. Roll a number of dice equal to each opponent's Negotiation Skill, using the other's Willpower Rating as the target number. Naturally, both sides are suspicious of the other, adding an automatic +2 modifier to the target number. The gamemaster sets the ratings for the fence.
The base price for any loot is 30 percent of its actual value, as listed in the Equipment Table, p. 254. For other loot, the gamemaster sets the prices.
Whichever side wins the Negotiation Test alters the price paid by 5 percent per extra success. If the fence won, the percentage paid will not drop below 10 percent. If the team won, the percentage of the actual cost paid will not rise above 50 percent.
The fence will almost certainly bring enough muscle along to forestall any unscrupulous business practices the team may consider. If the original owners of the loot are coming after it, they will show up at the meet as well.
LIFESTYLES OF THE RICH AND SHADOWY
Even though it may sometimes seem that many Shadowrun characters live in a bar, that is not so. Each character has a unique lifestyle, and the following information can be used to flesh out events that might occur in his life in between adventures. Most important is the effect a character's lifestyle has on healing, described at the end of the Combat chapter, p. 113.
Lifestyle measures the quality of the character's daily life and his or her living expenses, including shelter, food, entertainment, clothing, and so on. It does not cover technical resources, weapons, magical equipment, professional hirelings, or other major impersonal items. The player and the gamemaster can also make other decisions about interesting details of the character's lifestyle.
Almost infinite variations are available. For example, a character might live in an abandoned building, but install enough conveniences to qualify as having a Luxury lifestyle. Keeping all those gadgets running, buying security, maintaining water supplies, and keeping a low profile will cost as much as a mansion in a ritzy neighborhood.
A character living a Middle lifestyle or higher can support guests at a rate of 10 percent above his own cost of living per guest. A host can also keep a guest at a lower lifestyle than his own by paying 10 percent of the lower cost of the guest's lifestyle. Servants are often maintained in this manner.
LUXURY
This lifestyle offers the best of everything: spacious, ritzy digs, lots of hi-tech toys, the best food, drink, and you-name-it. The character has a household staff or a maid service or gadgets to do the mundane chores. He has a powerful car, maybe even a hot sports model or a chauffeured limo. Whether it's a big house, a snazzy condo, or the penthouse in a top hotel, this is the life for the high-stakes winners in the business: top executives, government big shots, high-level yakuza, and the shadowrunners who pull off the big scores.
Cost: 100,000¥ a month and up-up-up!
HIGH
A High lifestyle offers a roomy house or condo, good food, and the tech that makes life easy. So what if the character does not have the same perks as the big boys, but neither does he have as many people gunning for him. His home is in a secure zone or protected by some good solid bribes to the local police contractor and gang boss. There is a housekeeping service or enough tech to take care of most chores. A luxury commuter car is at his beck and call. This is the life for the well-to-do on either side of the law: mid-level managers, senior yakuza, and the like.
Cost: 10,000¥ a month
MIDDLE
The Middle lifestyle is not the best of everything, but is far from the worst. It offers a nice house or condo with lots of comforts. So characters eat some nutrisoy as well as natural food, but at least the autocook has a full suite of flavor faucets. Characters also have a commuter car or first-class tube pass. This is the lifestyle of ordinary successful wage-earners or criminals.
Cost: 5,000¥ a month
LOW
With this lifestyle, the character has an apartment, and nobody is likely to bother him much if he keeps the door bolted. Meals are regular. The nutrisoy may not taste great, but at least it's hot. And power and water are available during their area's assigned rationing periods. When those of the Low lifestyle travel, they ride the tube. Factory workers, petty crooks, and other folks stuck in a rut, just starting out, or kind of down on their luck tend to show up here.
Cost: 1,000¥ a month
SQUATTER
Life stinks and most of the time, so does the character. He eats low-grade nutrisoy and yeast, adding the flavors with an eyedropper. His home is a made-over building, converted into barracks, divided into closet-sized rooms, or maybe he just rents out a coffin-sized sleep tank by the night. The only thing worse than the Squatter lifestyle is living out on the streets.
Cost: 100¥ a month
STREETS
The character lives on the streets! Or in the sewers, steam tunnels, condemned buildings, or whatever flop he or she finds for the night. Food is where he finds it, bathing is a thing of the past, and the only security is what he creates for himself. The bottom of the ladder, inhabited by down-and-outers of all stripes.
Cost: Hey, chummer. Life ain't all bad: it's free.
HOSPITALIZED
This is a special lifestyle, applicable only when a character is sick or injured. The character is confined to a hospital, be it a real one, a clinic equipped as a hospital, or a private location with the necessary equipment installed. Characters cannot own this lifestyle. They only pay for it until they get well or go broke, whichever comes first.
Cost: 500¥ a day for basic care. 1,000¥ a day for intensive care.
KEEPING UP THE PAYMENTS
Characters have to shell out the nuyen each month to keep up a lifestyle. If they miss a payment, they may end up in debt and living a lower lifestyle.
Each month that a character misses a payment, roll 1 die. If the result is greater than the number of consecutive months of payments missed, no sweat. The missed payment is absorbed by the character's credit, which is part of the cost of his lifestyle. If he makes the next payment, everything is fine again.
If the die roll result is less than or equal to the number of missed months, the character is in trouble. His lifestyle gets downgraded to the next lower level. This means being evicted from his former home, having some of his tech repossessed, having to hock some clothes, and so on.
The character is also in debt, and owes somebody one month's cost of his former lifestyle. If the character is mostly legit, he's in debt to a credit company. If the character is a criminal or shadow person or now lives a lifestyle lower than Middle, being in debt may mean that he or she has defaulted on less-formal financial obligations. This can lead to earnest discussions with large persons on the subject of debt management. After the character gets out of the hospital, the loan can be paid back. And it had better be paid back. There's always a good market for fresh body parts. "Taking [a debt] out of your hide" takes on a whole new meaning in the year 2053.
BUYING A LIFESTYLE
A character can permanently buy a given lifestyle by making a payment equal to 100 months' upkeep. Ten million nuyen buys a permanent life of luxury. This represents investments, trust funds, and so on, that take care of payments. Admittedly, there is not much reason to spend 10,000¥ buying a permanent lifestyle as a squatter, though it might be useful if the character wants to maintain a getaway or hideout somewhere.
Nothing in life is certain, however. A character can lose a permanent lifestyle through an enemy's action or through sheer bad luck. A decker can rip investments to shreds, or enemies can simply blow holdings into scrap. These things depend on the way the character's story unfolds, not on how much is on his credstick at the time.
A permanent lifestyle of Middle or better can be sold. If the character has a couple of months to broker a legitimate deal, roll 2 dice. Multiply the result by 10 percent to determine how much of the purchase price the character is paid for the property. If the character is a shadow person, i.e., lacking a SIN, roll only 1 die. Also roll only 1 die if the character has to dump the property fast or through an agent because he is on the run.
KARMA
In Shadowrun, Karma measures the experience characters get when they go out on an adventure. They do not get Karma for doing the laundry, unless the laundromat is in an urban combat zone. Karma is used to improve Attributes, skills, and special resources.
Karma is awarded at the end of an adventure, but not necessarily after a single playing session. The gamemaster decides who gets Karma and how much they get. Every character in a group receives Karma for some things, but some awards go only to individuals.
Each surviving member of a team gets Karma for staying alive, succeeding at a mission, and for the degree of danger in the mission.
Individual characters can pick up additional Karma for good roleplaying, gutsy fighting, smart planning, sheer luck, and other personal feats.
Of the Karma a character gets, 90 percent of it becomes Good Karma, which is used over the long term for improving the character. Ten percent goes into the character's Karma Pool, which is used in the short term for general butt-saving. A character's Good Karma and Karma Pool are tracked separately. Always round off in favor of Good Karma.
GOOD KARMA
Good Karma is used between adventures to improve character ratings or gain benefits. A character can increase Physical and Mental Attributes 1 point by paying a number of Good Karma Points equal to the rating to which the Attribute is being raised. Raising a Strength of 5 to 6 would cost 6 Good Karma Points.
Attribute Ratings cannot normally exceed the character's racial maximum. However, if the gamemaster agrees, paying double the Good Karma Points can raise the Attribute above the racial maximum. For example, a human character who wanted to raise her Strength from 6 to 7 would have to spend 14 Good Karma Points to do so. The gamemaster should probably discourage players from raising a character's Attributes to beyond 1.5 × the racial maximum.
Good Karma can also raise Attributes that have been reduced for some reason. Though it is NEVER possible to use Karma to directly raise Reaction, Essence, and Magic, Reaction may change if Quickness or Intelligence is improved.
Skills
Skill Ratings can also be raised using Good Karma. Once the Karma has been paid, the Skill Rating goes up 1 point.
Once the character has begun the game, improvements in general skills, Concentrations, and Specializations all happen separately. Increasing a general skill does not automatically change the Concentration, and so on.
GOOD KARMA COST FOR SKILLS
Skill Type
Cost
General skills
2 × New Rating
Concentrations
1.5 × New Rating
Specializations
1 × New Rating
Languages
1 × New Rating

Iris has specialized in Firearms Skill. Her current ratings are Firearms 1, Pistols 3, and Beretta 101T, her chosen weapon, of 5.
Raising her general Firearms Skill from 1 to 2 costs 4 Karma Points.
Raising her Pistols skill from 3 to 4 costs 6 Karma Points.
Raising her Beretta 101T skill from 5 to a Specialization 6 costs 6 Karma Points.
New Concentrations are based on the existing general skill score. If the character has Firearms 4 and wants to concentrate with Pistols at 5, the Concentration would cost 5 × 1.5, or 8 Karma Points.
New Specializations are based on the existing Concentration score. If the character does not have an appropriate Concentration, use the general skill. Thus, if the character only wants to improve with the Remington Roomsweeper, the Specialization would cost 5 × 1, or 5 Karma Points, to reach Rating 5 in that specialized skill.
New skills cost 1 point of Good Karma for the first rating point.
A Hermetic magician must have unrestricted access to a sorcery library with a rating equal to, or greater than, the Sorcery Skill rating he wishes to acquire.
KARMA POOL
One-tenth (round up) of all Karma earned goes into the character's Karma Pool. The character can draw from it as needed during an encounter, but once the Karma Pool is emptied, it is no longer available for that encounter. The full value of the Karma Pool returns with the next encounter. (What constitutes an encounter? A single scene or event in the story. It might be a single location or several closely related areas. A running gun-battle might be a single encounter, or it might be a series of them. If the runners have time to catch their breath, it usually means a new scene, or encounter, has begun.)
Points from the Karma Pool can be used a number of ways.
Re-rolling Failures
A character can use 1 point from the Karma Pool to re-roll any test dice that failed. For example, the player rolls 4 dice and scores 2 successes. For 1 point of Karma, he can roll those 2 failed dice again. This process can be repeated, but each time it is done on a single test the Karma cost goes up by 1, until all the dice are successes or the character runs out of Karma.
Avoid an "Oops"
The Rule of One can be partially avoided. If all the character's dice come up 1, it usually means a disastrous failure. Paying 1 point of Karma does not allow a re-roll, but does turn the disaster into a simple failure. Additional Karma cannot be spent on the failure.
Buy Additional Dice
A character may spend 1 point of Karma to buy an additional die for use in a test, up to a maximum of however many skill, Attribute, or rating dice are in use, not including other Pool dice. These karmic dice score, and are used, normally.
Buying Successes
It is also possible to purchase raw success at a cost of 1 Karma Point per success, but on two hefty conditions. First, the character has to generate at least 1 success normally through the test. No natural, regular successes, no karmic successes. Second, Karma Pool dice spent to buy a success are gone (pffft) forever, expended permanently. They do not refresh with the pool in the next scene. Replacement Karma must be earned.
Adding to the Team Karma Pool
A character can permanently transfer points from his Karma Pool to the Team Karma Pool. These points are gone for good, even if the character later leaves the team. (What's a Team Karma Pool? Read on!)
TEAM KARMA
Just as a character has a Karma Pool, so does a Shadowrun team. Members of the team contribute points from their personal Karma Pools to the Team Karma Pool. Points from the Team Karma Pool can then be used exactly like points from a personal Karma Pool, but by any member of the team.
The Team Karma Pool refreshes every scene or encounter, in the same way as a personal Karma Pool. Any points from the Team Karma Pool used to buy successes are permanently lost, just as they are from a character's own Karma Pool.
When a team agrees to become a team, they make a list of the members, and each member must contribute at least 1 point of Karma from his or her own Karma Pool to the Team Karma Pool. Additional points can be added to the Team Karma Pool between scenes or encounters, or between adventures.
Points may not be removed from the Team Karma Pool unless one of the team members chooses to leave the team, or is asked to leave by the other members. In that case, one-half of the current Karma Points are removed from the Team Karma Pool. The departing character does not take these points with him, and if that character ever rejoins the team, he must add new Karma to the Pool. Those lost points do not reappear.
When a new member joins the team, he or she must pay the initial 1 point of Team Karma.
No Team Karma is lost when a team member dies, and a replacement for that character is treated as a new character.
A character can be part of more than one shadowrunning team, but each team that character belongs to subtracts from the value of his Team Karma contributions. The actual value of a Team Karma contribution is equal to the number of Karma Pool points transferred, minus the number of additional teams the character is a part of. If a character is part of two teams, it costs that character 2 Karma Pool points to contribute 1 point of Team Karma to either team.
Points can only be drawn from the Team Karma Pool if a majority of team members agree to do so. All the characters of the team need not be present in a scene or encounter for the Team Karma Pool to be used, but all the players present at the gaming session must still vote. In ties, the gamemaster should cast the deciding vote.
QUICK MATRIX SYSTEMS
This section presents a quick design system that lets a gamemaster whip up a "random" computer system in the Matrix. A quick system will come in handy for those times when the players dig up a clue indicating that the Crown Imperial Corp is behind some recent problem of theirs, inspiring the team's decker to pipe up with, "Zero sweat. I'll just hack into their 'puter and see what's on file."
Here's how to prepare a warm welcome.
DETERMINE BASE SECURITY RATING
To create the base Security Rating, the gamemaster can choose to simply select a number or else make a die roll to get a random number. Then he consults the Random Security Code Table to determine the system Security Rating. The hotter the system, the higher its base code.
RANDOM SECURITY CODE TABLE
1D6 Roll
Security Rating
1-2
Green
3-5
Orange
6
Red

DESIGN SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
To create the system's architecture, the gamemaster makes a series of die rolls to lay out each node in the system. He should continue to roll for new nodes until the system seems right. As each node is generated, draw it on the map.
The first node is always the SAN from which the decker will enter. Draw a second box, an SPU (SANs always connect to SPUs), then draw a line from the SAN to the SPU.
The SPU is now the current node. Roll 1D6 and check the SPU column of the Node Generation Table, below, to determine the next node. Run a line from the SPU to the new node. The new node usually becomes the current node for the next die roll. Ignore the result of the roll if it seems wrong. Simply decide how many nodes connect to this one, or roll 1D6. If there should be additional nodes, roll 1D6 (or simply choose) and then draw them in.
As the gamemaster draws in each new node, he should assign it a number for ease of reference during the adventure. In the sample system so far, there is Node 1 (the SAN) and Node 2 (the SPU).
About the only firm rule for designing computer architecture is that a system can have only one CPU. If a CPU is rolled early in the process, its location may be too easy to reach and so the roll should be ignored. If the system continues beyond the CPU, then a CPU result rolled in another node can either be ignored, or can mean that a line connects that node back to the CPU.
Having completed the basic system architecture, the gamemaster may continue to embellish it by adding more nodes, running additional connecting datalines, and making it a real maze. It is a good idea to make a duplicate map while doing this. Some decker might get to the CPU and demand to see what the system looks like.
NODE GENERATION TABLE
Current Node
1D6 Roll
Next Node
CPU
1
CPU


2
Datastore


3
CPU


4
CPU


5
CPU


6
CPU
SPU
1
CPU


2
SPU


3
SPU


4
Datastore


5
I/OP*


6
SN*
Datastore
1
Datastore


2
Datastore


3
Datastore


4
Datastore


5
SPU


6
I/OP*

*Add a line to a dead-end node: an SN, I/OP, or SAN. Stay in the current node for the next roll.
Example:
Starting from a SAN, connect to an SPU.
Roll = 5. A 5 in an SPU is a dead end. Add an I/OP and stay in SPU.
Roll = 1. A 1 in an SPU is the CPU. Too early. Ignore this roll.
Roll = 3. A 3 in an SPU is another SPU. Move to this SPU.
Roll = 3. A 3 in an SPU is a datastore. Move to the datastore.
Roll = 5. A 5 in a datastore is an SPU. Move to the SPU.
Roll = 6. A 6 in an SPU is a dead end: add an I/OP and stay in the SPU for the next roll.
Roll = 1. Finally! A 1 in an SPU is a CPU. Move to the CPU.
Roll = 6. Another datastore. Decide to stop here.
SET SECURITY CLASSIFICATIONS
For random systems, the gamemaster may want to assign the same Security Code (that's the color) to the whole system, but randomly roll a System Rating (the number) for each node. The classification can also be varied randomly by assigning different Security Codes to different parts of the system.
To vary the Security Code, roll 1D6. A result of 1 is one level lower than the overall Security Code picked earlier. On a green system, that would mean a blue-level node. A 6 is one level higher: on a green system, this would be an orange-level node.
Assign or roll 1D6 for the System Rating of each node. Note the numbers on the system map.
INSTALL IC
For each node, roll 1D6 to see if IC is present.
For a green node, IC is present on a roll of 1.
For an orange node, IC is present on a roll of 1 or 2.
For a red node, IC is present on a roll of 1, 2, or 3.
For the type of IC, roll 2D6 and consult the IC Installation Table.
If IC is present, roll 2D6 and consult the IC Program Table for the type of IC present. Of course, if the IC is black, there is no need to consult the next table—lethal is lethal, right?
All IC has a rating of 2D6 - 1.
IC INSTALLATION TABLE
Security locu
White IC
Gray IC
Black IC
Green
2-8
9-11
12
Orange
2-7
8-10
11-12
Red
2-6
7-10
11-12

ICE PROGRAM TABLE
WHITE IC
2D6 Roll
IC Type
2
Trapped IC*
3-7
Access
8-11
Barrier/Scramble**
12
Trapped IC*

*Trapped IC: Gray IC is hidden in the white IC. Roll 1D6 + 4 on the White IC part of the table to see what the obvious IC is. Then roll on the Gray IC part of the table for the hidden IC.
**Use scramble IC only in a datastore. Use barrier IC in any node (including a datastore.)
GRAY IC
2D6 Roll
IC Type
2-4
Blaster
5-6
Trace
7-8
Killer
9-11
Tar Baby
12
Tar Pit

INSTALL DATA VALUES
Data is loot. Roll 2D6 and consult the Data Value Table for the contents of each datastore. Unless the roll comes up a 2 or a 12, the datastore will contain 1D6 valuable files. The size of each file is 2D6 × 10 Mp. The decker needs the evaluate program to find the valuable files.
Besides randomly stocking loot, the gamemaster should place any files containing specific information the decker is seeking in the datastores. He can scatter it around. Let's say the team was attacked by a gang called the Cutter Larks. They suspect that Crown Imperial hired the gang to do them dirty. In one datastore the gamemaster might place a file that contains a payment from Corporate Account #324A7 to the Gutter Larks. Another file in another datastore might indicate that Ivan Dragomilov is the officer authorized to release funds from account #324A7. A third file (perhaps back in the first datastore) identifies Dragomilov as a junior executive in corporate security, and gives his address, photo, and so on. This information lets the team find Mr. Dragomilov and ask a few pointed questions in person.
To determine the value of the files, roll 2D6 and consult the Data Value Table below. In an orange datastore, for example, a character rolls 2D6 and scores 9. That means the base value is 10,000¥ per 10 Mp of data. To determine how many valuable files are present, the character rolls 1D6, scoring 3. There are three valuable files. For each file, he rolls 2D6 again, scoring 7, 9, and 4. The files are 70 Mp (worth 70,000¥), 90 Mp (worth 90,000¥), and 40 Mp (worth 40,000¥). If the decker can download them all, the "list price" of the swag will be about 200,000¥ from this datastore. But the stuff has to be fenced, which means only 60 to 100 thou take-home pay.
DATA VALUE TABLE
Value per 10 Mp of data
2D6 Roll
Green
Orange
Red
2
0
0
0
3-4
500¥
1,000¥
2,500¥
5-7
1,000¥
2,500¥
5,000¥
8-10
5,000¥
10,000¥
50,000¥
11
10,000¥
50,000¥
100,000¥
12
0
0
0

GAME LETHALITY
Face it, not everyone likes the same thing in a game. One of the biggest points of contention is how lethal a combat system should be, especially for a dark, gritty game like Shadowrun. Some players and gamemasters want a "realistic" system, where any punk with a gun is a threat. Others prefer a combat style like those found in pulp-fiction or action films, where the major criteria of success is the number of rounds fired. Others like it somewhere in the middle.
To that end (and to keep everybody happy) the design of the Shadowrun system allows the gamemaster to adjust combat lethality. As written, the game is pretty deadly. A punk with a gun and decent skill is definitely a threat. Gamemasters and players who like that style should use the rules as written. For a less-lethal game, increase all armor's Ballistic Armor Rating by 50 percent (round up). For an even less lethal system, double the Ballistic Armor Ratings. In all instances, the rating of impact armor should remain the same. The gamemaster can also make other adjustments.
Melee combat, as written, is fairly survivable. To make it more lethal, increase the Power Ratings of the attacks by 50 percent. For really deadly combat, double the calculated Power. (We do not advise this. Who wants to deal with a troll that can hit with a Power of 24+?)
If magic seems too powerful, double the base Drain target number from one-half force to force. This adjustment does not make magic any less deadly, but it will give magicians second thoughts about the power of the spells they want to cast. If the magic in the game is really too powerful, then use Force as the base Drain target number, and halve the Spell Resistance target numbers.
Matrix combat can be balanced by adjusting Security Ratings and IC Ratings.
Remember, though, that none of these options is more right than any other—it’s all a question of taste. As always, players and gamemasters should agree on any modifications to the rules before beginning play.
LETHALITY ADJUSTMENTS TABLE


High Threat
Medium Threat
Low Threat
Firearms






Ballistic Armor
As is
1.5 × Rating
2 × Rating
Melee Combat






Attack Power
2 × Power
1.5 × Power
As is
Magic






Drain Target Number
As is
Force
Force
Spell Resistance Target Number
Force
Force
½ Force

SHADOWRUNNING
The 2050s are an exciting, dangerous time with plenty of opportunity for adventure. And that is where the player characters come in. Whether making a run on some megacorp’s mainframe or providing security for a visiting dignitary or busting a friend out of a detention center, they are the heroes. The adventures a gamemaster creates should challenge the players’ wits even more than their guns, and he should reward good roleplaying as much or more than lucky dice-rolling.
When getting a group of players together, the gamemaster ought to learn something of their interests or else his adventures are likely to flop. One of the most important matters to consider in planning the mission is to invent one the players would really like to tackle. But don’t expect a lot at first. They probably know less about the ways of the game universe than the gamemaster, and may have only vague ideas about what they want to do. They might want to make money, take on a corrupt corp, deal with elves, and so on. Once they get a few runs under their belts and their characters’ life stories take some shape, the players’ goals and ideas will gradually become more defined. They may want to hunt down a particular enemy, or find a lost love, or take revenge on a corporation that did them dirty, or find a specific teacher or piece of custom gear. The gamemaster can and should build these ideas and suggestions into major themes in his adventures.
Encourage the players to write out their characters’ histories, including background on family, friends, and previous employment. The gamemaster can then draw on those histories to develop adventures that get everyone involved.
Be Aware!
The gamemaster has to keep a lot in mind. Listen to what the players say. Keep track of the NPCs: their whereabouts, plans, and so on. Keep a note pad handy for jotting down memos as the adventure rolls along.
Be Knowledgeable!
A gamemaster needs to be familiar with the whole game. That does not mean memorizing the whole rulebook, but he or she should be familiar enough with it to be able to find a particular rule or rules quickly when needed. The gamemaster should also have a good knowledge of the basic game systems.
Keep a written outline for the adventure handy for quick reference when necessary. Experienced gamemasters usually improvise more, but those just starting out will usually find it best to think through the adventures in advance and to keep them relatively simple.
Be Fair!
Stick to the rules. If the gamemaster or players hate something written here, change it. Make sure everyone knows what the new rule is.
Remember that the gamemaster knows much more about what is happening than the NPCs do. The gamemaster may know the player characters’ skills, weapons, spells, and so on, but the NPCs do not. It would be unfair to let the NPCs behave and make plans based on that knowledge.
Be Realistic!
Remember also that the NPCs played by the gamemaster are people, with fears, needs, hopes, and desires. By giving them life, the stories that come out of the game will be more memorable for everybody involved.
Play critters like real critters, too. For example, most animals have little or no interest in killing for pleasure. They fight out of necessity—to eat, to protect their young, to save their own hides.
Be Flexible!
If a player wants to do something not explicitly covered in the rules, don’t just refuse on principle. There is always a skill rating of some kind that can be used for a test. Tell the player what skill or Attribute applies to the situation and whether the chances are good, indifferent, or terrible. Don’t reveal the precise target numbers, just hint at whether or not the intended action or move is possible.
If a new rule is created to cover a special situation during a game, decide later what to do with it. It might become a new “house rule” that will always apply in future, or a one-shot solution that may or may not be used again. The middle of a shadowrun is no place to discuss the fine points of game mechanics.
Be Tough!
Challenge the players. If they don’t sweat to get that Karma, they haven’t earned it. Two goons armed with baseball bats would not be the only security guarding the corporate data center, and the local yakuza won’t keep their main database on a home computer.
Once everyone is comfortable with the way the rules work, it’ll be easier to fine-tune the “threat level” of an adventure. For now, keep in mind that on a really rough run, the player characters should, ideally, win it only by the skin of their teeth, if they win at all. But if the gamemaster doesn’t get it right at first, nobody’s gonna fry him (we hope).
Be Kind!
How can a gamemaster be tough and kind? A gamemaster can kill off a character anytime. He can throw enormous risks at the player characters until their luck runs out and they fail a test. But only cheap bullies do that. Gamemasters who measure their success in trashed character sheets soon find themselves without players. Better to be too easy on the characters than too deadly.
When the player characters get in over their heads, remember that bad guys like to take prisoners. Prisoners can be made to talk. Prisoners can be used as hostages. Prisoners can also pay ransoms. Most important, prisoners have a chance to escape and live to fight another day. If fictional villains were smart enough to kill off the heroes at the first opportunity, then all the adventure movies ever made would end after the first 10 minutes.
DEATH AND SHADOWRUNNING
In any roleplaying game, death is a touchy subject. Nobody likes it when a favorite character buys the farm. In Shadowrun, agricultural property can come very cheap. Characters can get splattered before they know what is happening. Despite all the special rules and hi-tech medicine, player characters are going to die.
Sometimes, the gamemaster may have to cheat to keep characters alive. If, in the gamemaster’s opinion, the player did everything right and just had bad luck in rolling dice, the character does not have to die. Knock the character out! Stick him in the hospital! Whatever! Don’t let a well-developed character die just because the player rolled a 2 when the character needed a 3. The gamemaster can and should decide that he stays alive long enough to get to a hospital.
The same goes for the best NPCs. If the villain the gamemaster spent hours designing gets hit by a lucky shot and does not resist the damage, the body can always be buried under a collapsing building or suffer some other disaster that “no one could possibly survive.” A few months later, the villain can show up, held together by glue and cyberware, ready for revenge against the player characters.
CREATING AN ADVENTURE
There are lots of adventures to play and lots of ways to play them. Each of dozens of roleplaying games published has taken a swing at describing how to write a good adventure. There have been hundreds of articles on the subject, too. Experience is the best teacher, but some suggestions and tips for taking care of certain details may help.
The main elements of an adventure usually include objectives, motivations, and opposition.
Objectives
In order to “win” the adventure, characters usually have to survive, for starters. Beyond that, the team has to carry out some specific task: find the lost gizmo, rescue the kidnap victim, pay off a debt, kill or capture the villain, or foil his plan. At first, the real objective(s) may not be obvious. The adventuring team may have believed they were doing a run on a corporate mainframe to get the nuyen to pay off their bookie—until they find a file with the plan to clear out a tribal holding so the corp can build a plant. If it so happens that one of the characters belongs to that tribe, the team gets a new objective: foil the plan.
When writing an adventure, keep track of the objectives and give characters a chance to fulfill them. Let them find clues or be given assignments that reveal objectives. Objectives are worth Karma, so this is important.
Motivation
Suppose the gamemaster has an adventure all worked out and sends Mr. Johnson to the team with a job offer that will catapult them into the adventure. After listening to the pitch, the team says, “No thanks, Mr. J. We’ll take a big pass on this one.”
This may be the time to talk to the players about why they don’t want to tackle the adventure. Too dangerous? Too little reward? If the problem is money, push the fees up a little. Some characters might want payment in kind rather than credit: magicians want teachers or supplies, deckers want time on a mainframe to design programs; samurai like access to new hardware, and so on. Everybody likes information, so maybe Mr. Johnson can come up with the passcodes to a certain mainframe, hmmm?
If the whole premise of the adventure bores the players silly, it may be better to simply scrap this session in favor of a bull session on the kinds of things the players want their characters to do.
The more information players give the gamemaster about their characters’ lives, beliefs, and psychology, the more material the gamemaster has to build motivation into the adventures. As the players get into the game, characters will acquire friends, enemies, obligations and quirks. These also can be used to motivate adventurers.
Opposition
Most adventures involve some opposition. The team must face and defeat an enemy in order to achieve their objectives. Enemies can be anonymous forces, or they can be very personal. The world of Shadowrun provides a wide array of possible enemies.
Shadowrunners often tackle big organizations. When possible, they do so obliquely, rather than risk getting smeared by standing in the open and challenging the opposition to come out and fight. Big organizations are usually bureaucratic nightmares, riddled with politics and slow to react. Shadowrunners can dance around the giant, stinging it instead of going head-to-head. Often, corporate opposition is actually an individual who runs a piece of the organization, rather than the whole show. If the team defeats that individual, the larger organization will usually throw the guy to the wolves. Organizations rarely try to exact revenge, because revenge shows no gain on a balance sheet.
Opposition can also come from individuals or from small groups more on a level with the team itself. This can get personal very quickly. A good enemy is a valuable resource in writing future adventures. Depending on how seriously the shadowrunners work him over, such a foe may want to waste the team for no other reason than revenge. Adventures become a series of duels between the player characters and their relentless foe, building up to a final showdown.
The following descriptions of some typical organized foes may be useful.
Corporations: The enormous megacorps of 2053 offer plenty of niches for ruthless individuals willing to use any means necessary to advance their plans, whether it be winning a corporate objective or feathering their own nests. Corps are at least nominally sensitive to public opinion and government oversight; after all, boycotts, lawsuits, and investigations are bad for business. If the characters run up against a corporate executive and trash his illegal plan, the parent company will, more than likely, piously disclaim any knowledge of the criminal’s actions.
Organized Crime: Crime is a growth industry in the 2050s. The team, especially if its members are SINless, are themselves members of the underworld. The underworld is also a rich source of enemies. The Big Boys are still around, typified by the yakuza, Japan’s equivalent of the Mafia.
Tackling any criminal organization can be deadly because such groups can move quickly and decisively. There are power struggles in the underworld that characters can exploit, and the samurai-like code of the underworld can also work to the shadowrunners’ advantage. If they play “by the rules” and their opponent does not, their foe’s own fellow-criminals may turn on them.
Government: In the chaotic politics of the Sixth World, government can be an enemy or an ally. Governments are big and powerful, but clumsy when trying to swat a mosquito-sized enemy. A typical government enemy is an intelligence organization or a bureaucratic office. If the opposition is operating covertly or illegally, then it can be defeated by exposure, because the government will disclaim all knowledge of these activities and leave the head of the agency to twist slowly in the wind.
Police: The cops can be with you or against you. The typical law enforcement contractors in Shadowrun are stretched thin trying to keep the people they protect from going under in a wave of crime. Widespread corruption often leaves the clean cops powerless. The typical police opposition should be a crooked officer, possibly a precinct commander, whose schemes cross the team’s trail. Of course, if the characters are simply a bunch of thugs, preying on the innocent, then every cop in the city will be out for their blood, and rightly so.
Policlubs: Policlubs, or front groups for policlubs, or the hidden masters of policlubs, make good opposition. Stinkers like the Humanis are prime villains. Policlubs are usually riddled with internal politics and extremely sensitive to bad publicity. Unlike the other groups, they don’t have crack mercenaries on call, but their people are often fanatics. Typical policlub opposition will be a local chapter or splinter group with an agenda that includes blackmail, assassination, terrorism, and the like.
Adding Color
An adventure needs to engage the imagination, which is really what roleplaying is all about. Players need to see the scenery, hear the gunshots, feel the sweat trickling down their necks. Some players will do most of the work. Others will make the gamemaster want to tear his hair out because they refuse to play along. Most will fall in the middle.
As a wise old gamemaster once said, “Don’t tell me what is happening, show me!” Good advice. Avoid reciting descriptions in a dull monotone. Overact! Ham it up.
If possible, use some kind of display with miniatures to show players the territory. It’s much easier to draw a wall with a door in it than to try and explain the layout verbally. This kind of display also avoids all manner of arguments as to who is standing in the line of fire, where the grenade goes when someone tosses it, and so on.
When the team taps into a datafile containing a fiendish corporate plan, don’t just read it to them. Write one up before the adventure and hand it to them. Every such prop speeds up play and adds color.
Make the NPCs as colorful as possible. A lot of gamemasters act in character when playing NPCs, complete with funny voices. Being a ham helps. Steal wholeheartedly from comic books, movies, TV, and fiction. If the gamemaster wants to play a fixer like Groucho Marx, go ahead. If, on the other hand, this kind of playacting doesn’t suit the group, don’t bother with it.
Color should not come only from the gamemaster. Players should try to stay in character too. Besides providing players with enemies, loot, and Karma, adventures include subplots to advance the shadowrunners’ life stories when they are not in a firefight or decking into the Matrix. Do they have a love life? If not, do they want one? Who are their friends? How do they spend their time? Try and have at least part of each adventure develop these details.
Prep Time
This is time the characters will need to get ready for the run (the gamemaster should take some, too). The players will always want to do a lot of preparation before taking on anything they think is tough. They will need to scope the place out, check on the principal opposition’s background, look for subordinates to suborn, and such. They can spend a whole session getting ready. Don’t let them.
To keep it moving, have some of that info available for them. Pass it on through a contact or their fixer. If they want to double-check or do their own snooping, compress the time. If the decker wants to hunt around, have the player make a single dice roll and use the number of successes to decide how much info he or she finds. If one of the team wants to get friendly with somebody in the target organization, or monitor activities to learn schedules and/or procedures, let the player make one die roll for an appropriate skill or Attribute. Weigh the number of successes rolled and how little time is left before you give them the information that they want to know. Give it some probability of accuracy. (“You’re pretty sure the wage slave thinks you’re an okay dude.” or “They’ve changed the passcodes at two o’clock for three of the last four days. The other time it was at three o’clock and they had a fire drill that day.”) After all, the characters are still guessing at how likely it is that what they’ve seen or learned represents standard conditions. If they want special gear, let them put the word out. The stuff may or may not be available in the time given them. The gamemaster decides.
In short, give the team a little prep time, but don’t let them keep the curtain from rising on time. If the clock’s ticking, let them know. After all, how long is it going to take Aztechnology to mess up the mage they grabbed? Can’t wait too long before the runners spring her. If they’re not moving fast enough, turn up the heat.
Techniques for Less Stressful Shadowruns
Here are some tips that gamemasters can use to keep track of story lines, NPCs, combat, computer networks, and the zillion and one other things that go into an adventure.
Equalizers: Sometimes the team is going to get into more trouble than they can handle alone. If the gamemaster wants to bail them out, he can add an equalizer to the adventure. Say the player who runs the team’s magician is sick and does not show up. The team is hosed without a mage, so the gamemaster can whip up an NPC magician to work with the team.
Try letting a player run the equalizer, but be ready to take control of the NPC’s actions if the player does not remain in character.
Displays: A visual aid is so useful it is almost essential. Draw it on a big pad of paper, or use the various plastic mats made for gamers, with hexagonal or square grids. For figures, 25mm-scale metal miniatures (we kinda like the official Shadowrun™ figures) pack a lot of atmospheric detail and are small enough not to need an auditorium for a firefight.
Maps: Maps are powerful tools. A map of the city where the campaign is set, even if it’s just a sketch with shapes showing neighborhoods, is also darn near essential. Try using two: one to show the city that everyone knows (share this with the players) and another that shows the locations of all those secret places (keep this one). As the team discovers these locations, they can add them to the “public” map.
Cities are going to change a lot in the next sixty years, but the gamemaster can still take an ordinary street map and use it for adventures. Use colored pens to indicate the neighborhoods and other areas on a map. A card file, notebook, or database program can be used to keep a list of useful or interesting addresses.
Maps of smaller places (buildings, sewers, neighborhoods, and so on) are also important. Draw them, use maps of real places, or borrow them from game adventures. Don’t be afraid to re-use them, either—many real buildings have very similar floorplans.
Masterminds: Whenever writing an adventure, even a small one, consider whether it might be part of some vast conspiracy. The mastermind could be an organization or an individual. Drop occasional clues for the player characters and hint at such conspiracies, even if one does not exist in this particular case. Paranoia is not a problem in Shadowrun. It’s a way of life.
As ideas for the mastermind(s) come up, make notes. Eventually, the team should start encountering a mastermind directly. How surprised they will be to find that he already hates their guts. They don’t know that they’ve been lousing up his plans for months!
NPC files: A file of major NPCs is a great help. Use a card file, a notebook, or a computer database to store profiles on contacts, family members, lovers, major specialists (magicians, doctors, lawyers), major NPCs in your game, the local police commander; any NPC likely to be used in adventures again and again. Easy access is important to keep the game moving.
Prepare some stock NPC profiles (wagemages, goons, gang members, and so on) for quick reference. If the profiles FASA publishes keep showing up again and again, players are eventually going to be pretty familiar with the bad guys’ stats.
Secrecy
There are a lot of situations in Shadowrun that would benefit from a bit of secrecy. Sometimes simply announcing a target number tells the players some important piece of information that they shouldn’t know. One alternative is to have the player roll the dice and announce the results. Then the gamemaster figures out the successes and relates what happens.
Sometimes, just asking for a die roll can give away information. If the only time the gamemaster asks for a Perception Test is when the characters are about to enter a trap or ambush, they won’t stay guessing for long. It doesn’t hurt to occasionally ask all the characters to roll the dice for no reason at all: provide an imaginary target number or be very mysterious and just ask for their die roll results. Try nodding sagely at the results, or saying “Hunh, I thought so.” Remember what we said about paranoia.
Be careful not to give away the importance of a person or thing by describing it in overly detailed terms. A wealth of detail will indicate that the gamemaster has probably spent a lot of time designing him, her, or it. For example, when the team is meeting three NPCs (one of whom is the villain, while the other two are just his goons) refrain from saying, “You meet three suits from the corporation. The guy on the left is wearing a fancy outfit and smells of a distinctive cologne, with an opal ring on his left pinkie and obvious cyberware mods that make him a deadly fighter. The other two? Oh, uh, they’re just goons.” Either describe all three in detail (keep the players guessing as to which one is the main NPC to watch) or just introduce all three as “typical suits, ya know?”
AWARDING KARMA
Characters get Karma for surviving an adventure and more Karma if they do well in the process. The gamemaster makes the awards. Give all surviving team members Karma in equal amounts, based on the following criteria.
Team Karma
A typical adventure should be worth maybe 3 to 4 team Karma Points. One for survival, a couple of objectives, and a point for the danger along the way. A real horror show would be worth 6 to 8 points or so, but that requires combat, danger, and powerful opposition, where the objective is wrapped in twisting paths of mystery!
Survival: If the characters live, they get a point of Karma. Ain’t life grand?
Success: For every objective in the adventure that the team achieved, give each member a point of Karma. Partial awards are allowed. If they foiled the evil plan and stole the technological gizmo but the villain escaped, they get 2 out of a possible 3.
Threat: Award extra Karma for dangerous adventures. A simple mission might not carry any bonus, but a mission against high odds or one where a dangerous enemy is involved is worth 1 or 2 extra points. A whirling nightmare of combat, confusion, and betrayal is worth 3 Karma Points each to the survivors. Let the level of opposition influence this. Even a simple run against a superior enemy (a powerful corp type or a yakuza oyabun) is worth extra Karma.
Individual Karma Awards
Team awards are made to everybody who participates in an adventure, even if a character did not get into the spotlight this time around. Individual Karma is awarded to characters who personally advance the story or the overall gaming enjoyment in some way.
If a character has an absolutely amazing run, and the group succeeds at a very nasty mission, he might get up to 10 or 12 Karma Points. A Karma award greater than 12 points for a single adventure should probably never happen.
Roleplaying: Award 1 Karma Point to players who mostly stayed in character. Really good roleplaying is worth 2 Karma Points. The standards of roleplaying will depend on how a gamemaster and his or her group like to play. Be flexible! This is supposed to be fun, not a course in method acting.
Guts: Brave and/or effective fighters should get a point or two of Karma. Stupidly brave fighters don’t earn this award. If they are lucky enough to survive, that is its own reward. This would include gutsy magical battles in astral space and desperate combat in the Matrix as well as shoot-em-ups in the physical world.
Smarts: Players who come up with a clever strategy, or solve a puzzling clue, or pull off a good scam, should get at least 1 point of Karma for their characters. This includes those smart enough to know when to surrender or run.
Right Place-Right Time: Characters who are in the right place, with the right skill to do some necessary job, should get a point of Karma. Don’t award Karma just for making good die rolls. The award is for having a skill that is vital and knowing when to use it.
If the players knew they needed a lock picked and so had a character slot the Lockpicking Skill beforehand, a Karma award is unsuitable. If the team got trapped in a dead-end alley, with the bad guys closing in, and one of them spotted the old doorway and picked the lock under fire so the team could escape—well, that’s a different story.
Surprise: Players can surprise you with plans that absolutely kill the story line. A surprising and effective strategy is worth a Karma Point to the player who comes up with it. Surprising and silly actions, on the other hand, get zip.
Humor: If a player, acting in character, can paralyze the entire gaming group with laughter, that is worth 1 Karma Point in an adventure. We are in this for fun, after all.
Drama: Likewise, if a player, acting in character, impresses the group with a particular piece of high drama (maybe even high melodrama), he should get a point of Karma.
REPUTATION
For a convenient measure of a character’s reputation, keep a running total of his Karma. Keep two scores: private rep, which is the total Karma gained, and public rep, which may be a lesser number.
Private rep is known only in the shadows. No matter how cool the character may be, how slick the runs are, word will get out that the character’s the one to see for a quiet job.
Public rep is how well known the character is outside this elite community, among the cops, petty fixers, and the media, for example. The gamemaster decides how much of the Karma for an adventure is public. If the character is really good, he may be able to stay in the shadows.
To determine if a character is known or not, subtract the public or private rep of the character from 1,000. Then divide that value by 50. That number is the target number for any Etiquette or similar tests that a non-player character makes to see if he has heard of the player character.
CRITTERS
GEAR
When you cut someone nowadays, you don't know whether they're going to bleed or leak hydraulic fluid. -Evil Eye, Tiger gang member
This section provides a fine selection of items from various Grid-catalogs, fixer shops, and talismonger haunts of 2053. All prices are MSRP (manufacturer's suggested retail price). Actual street price will vary. (See Availability in Behind the Scenes, p. 184.)
PERSONAL WEAPONS
These weapons are the basic hand-to-hand fighting implements still in use today. This list does not include impromptu weapons created from material on hand.
Katana: The two-handed "samurai" sword favored by those with a taste for the romantic and old-fashioned. 1,000¥
Knife: A basic all-purpose street cutter. 30¥
Monofilament Whip: A near-monomolecular cord, it is swung with a weight at the end for control. It is extremely sharp and will cut through just about anything. (See Monofilament Whip rules on p. 103.) 3,000¥
Polearm: An unlikely and rare weapon, these days. It is included to give an idea of weapon types. 500¥
Staff: This is popular with magicians, for that traditional look. 50¥
Stun Baton: The standard riot-control weapon, this weighted stick delivers an electrical charge. (See Shock Weapons, p. 103.) 750¥
Sword: This refers to any of a variety of ceremonial styles and also covers some of the longer and more –vicious knives. 500¥
IMPACT PROJECTILE WEAPONS
These weapons are man-powered, and may make use of simple mechanical assistance for additional distance or speed.
Bows: This can be either a traditional longbow of fiberglass or wood or a modern-compound and pulley bow. 100¥ x STR. Min (plus 100¥/10 arrows)
Crossbow: These come in three grades. Lights are cocked by hand, while the heavier models use a built-in, side-wheel gear to assist re-cocking. 300¥ for light, 500¥ for medium, 750¥ for heavy (plus 100¥/20 bolts)
Throwing Knife: Any of a variety of slim knives or spikes. 20¥
Shuriken: A multi-edged or spiked, airfoil throwing blade. 30¥
FIREARMS
Firearms are primarily slug-throwers. The principle has not changed much over the years. Many weapons offer two versions, for standard loads or for caseless ammunition, though the latter is far more common in the 2050s. A weapon can either fire one form of ammunition or the other, but not both interchangeably. Ammo cost is the same. In either case, a digital ammunition counter is standard. The readout usually appears on the rear sight, where the user can see it when firing.
PISTOLS
Standard pistols are able to mount barrel- and top-mounting firearm accessories only. Revolvers cannot use silencers or sound suppressers. Hold-out pistols cannot mount any accessories.
Streetline Special: This is a common hold-out pistol found among the lowest economic level of society. Made of composite materials, it is small, lightweight, and extremely concealable. 100¥
Walther Palm Pistol: This European hold-out design packs one large-caliber round in each of its over-under barrels. A select switch allows the user to fire both barrels simultaneously (treat as a Short Burst, p. 92). 200¥
Colt America L36: This light American design is popular among the style-conscious because of its sleek profile, which also makes it easy to conceal. 350¥
Beretta Model 101T: This slim-line light personal weapon is favored by corporate personnel worldwide. 350¥
Ares Predator: Considered by many the premier heavy pistol, the Predator is a menacing weapon that is popular among mercenaries and security services. 450¥
Browning Max-Power: This is the primary contender against the Ares Predator as the toughest heavy pistol. 450¥
Ruger Super Warhawk: This heavy revolver accepts all standard accessories except, of course, a silencer. 300¥
Remington Roomsweeper: The short-barreled Roomsweeper heavy shotgun is popular with the urban fighter for its high take-down capability and significant intimidation factor. (The weapon uses heavy-pistol ranges, but Shotgun rules, see p. 95.) 300¥
Ares Viper: This pistol fires flechette ammunition (already factored into its Damage Code). The silvergun has the range of a heavy pistol even though it is really a light pistol. The Viper features a built-in silencer. 600¥
SUBMACHINE GUNS (SMGS)
SMGs are able to accept one top mounting, one barrel mounting, and one under-barrel mounting firearms accessory, with the exception of grenade launchers. SMGs cannot use silencers, but can use sound suppressers.
Uzi III: This is a worthy descendent of the famous Israeli Uzi. The Fabrique Nationale model, officially manufactured for the French government, is one of the more common street weapons. It features an integral folding stock and laser sight (top mount). The very similar Ingram Mk. 22 omits the laser sight. 600¥
Heckler & Koch HK227: This is the SMG of choice for many corporate security, military police, and base security units worldwide. The standard model boasts a retractable stock, integral laser sights (under-barrel mount), and a gas-vent recoil compensation system (barrel mount, Rating 2). The S variant, popular with corp strike teams and special forces, substitutes an integral silencer for the recoil system. 1,500¥ (1,200¥ for S variant)
Ingram Valiant: Popular with merc units around the world, this is the most common model of light machine gun. Models like the Ares light machine gun and Ingram Valiant have a hip-brace recoil pad (Rating 1) and an ammunition bin slung over the back or hip to feed belted ammo to the weapon. A gas-vent recoil compensation system (barrel mount, Rating 2) is standard equipment on these popular models. 1,500¥
RIFLES
Rifles are able to mount one barrel-, one under-barrel-, and one top-mounting firearm accessory. Some rifles come with rigid shoulder stocks, and some with folding stocks. Neither affect recoil. Shotguns cannot mount silencers or sound suppressers.
FN HAR: This assault rifle is common in Europe and increasingly popular with corporate response teams and private security forces specializing in high-threat areas. It comes with an integral folding stock, laser sight (top mount), and gas-vent recoil compensation system (barrel mount, Rating 2). 1,200¥
Soviet AK-97: Originally a Soviet weapon, this assault rifle is now found worldwide. The SMG carbine form, with its integral folding stock, is almost as common. Mounting a grenade launcher on either model is extremely difficult, though the AK-98 features an integral mini-grenade launcher (under-barrel mount). 700¥ for AK-97, 800¥ for carbine, 2,500¥ for AK-98
Remington 750: Long and sleek, the 750 sport rifle and the 950, its heavy-duty sister, have been the choice of hunters for nearly 50 years. Both use a smooth bolt-operated action of supreme reliability. A top-mount image magnifying scope (Rating 1) is standard with either model. Under-barrel mounting is not available. 600¥ for 750, 800¥ for 950
Ranger Arms SM-3: The SM-3 is a must for those jobs when the first shot has to count. Combined barrel-mount gas-vent recoil compensator (Rating 2) and silencer, and imaging scope magnification (top-mount, Rating 3) with thermographic or low-light circuits are standard equipment. Like most of its breed, it disassembles completely and will fit into a standard briefcase with no loss of accuracy. (Three Complex Actions required to assemble/disassemble.) Ideal for the assassin on the go, but does not stand up well to combat use. The number of turns this rifle is carried and used as a combat weapon (outside of its intended sniper role) equals the chance on a roll of 2D6 that the weapon suffers a +2 target number modifier due to loss of alignment of its precision and calibrated parts. (For example, John uses his SM-3 to discourage his pursuers while making a strategic retreat through a garbage-cluttered alley. His rifle gets bumped around for 3 turns. If his player rolls a 3 on 2D6, John must add +2 to all weapon target numbers.) 4,000¥
Enfield AS-7: This assault shotgun provides massive firepower. It has an integral laser sight (top mount) and is fitted with a 10-shot clip or 50-shot drum (drum adds -3 to Concealability, +2 kg to weight). 1,000¥
Defiance T-250: A popular autoloading shotgun available in full size and short barrel (use heavy-pistol ranges) versions. It has no under-barrel mount. 500¥
TASER WEAPONS
Some police and security units favor these electroshock weapons in low-threat environments. The standard model fires a dart that trails a 10-meter-long wire. An electric charge surges down the wire to incapacitate the target as long as the current flows. A variant on these weapons fires darts that contain high-capacitance batteries. The darts discharge on contact, stunning the target, virtually paralyzing it. See Shock Weapons, p. 103, for rules.
Defiance Super Shock: The most popular taser weapon in service with UCAS law enforcement agencies, the SS packs side-by-side heavy darts. Standard issue pistols have integral low-light imaging scopes (top mount). 1,000¥
HEAVY WEAPONS
Heavy weapons can generally mount one barrel, one under-barrel, and one top-mounting accessory, as applicable. Missile and rocket launchers do not use standard firearm accessories.
Machine Gun: These autofire weapons come in two grades, medium and heavy. They normally use belt ammo feeds. Though usually mounted on tripods, medium machine guns are occasionally used on gyro-stabilized mounts as mobile infantry support weapons. 2,500¥ for medium, 4,000¥ for heavy
Assault Cannon: This massive weapon fires shells equivalent to explosive bullets, but without the inherent instability. The shells also have limited armor-piercing capability, making the weapon useful in a wide range of applications. It can use belted ammo. 6,500¥
Missile/Rocket Launcher: The various missile and rocket launchers of the previous century have given way to weapons emphasizing flexible delivery systems and eliminating the back-blast problems so common in early systems. The typical launcher is reusable and breaks open to load up to four missiles. Its sighting mechanism, shoulder brace, and exhaust tube are collapsible, making the weapon a compact bundle when disassembled. 8,000¥ for the launcher alone.
Anti-Vehicle Rockets/Missiles (AVR/AVM): Pierce a vehicle's armor, and they do not explode if they miss. 2,000¥ for AVR, 5,000¥ for AVM
Anti-Personnel Rockets/Missiles (APR/APM): Have high-explosive and fragmentation warheads. 1,000¥ for APR, 2,500¥ for APM
High-Explosive Rockets/Missiles (HER/HEM): Cause general destruction. 1,500¥ for HER, 3,750¥ for HEM
FIREARM ACCESSORIES
Note that Concealability Rating adjustments on the following accessories refer only to the installation of these accessories after purchase. If the weapon description lists the accessory as "integral," no Concealability modifier is added. It also means the accessory cannot be removed.
Bipods: Bipods are two-legged braces that extend downward from the weapon, allowing the weapon to be fired low to the ground with the user in a sitting or lying position. A bipod uses the under-barrel mount, does not affect Concealability, and provides 2 points of recoil compensation. 400¥
Concealable Holster: Custom-fitted to the wearer, the holster can be designed for wear over the hip, in the small of the back, under the arm, on the forearm, or on the ankle. It adds +2 to the Concealability of a pistol (Concealed weapons require a Perception Test to spot. The Concealability Rating is the target number.) 100¥
Gas-Vent System: Gas-vent recoil compensation systems vent a weapon's barrel gases at a specific vector to counter barrel climb. These systems are all barrel-mounted, and subtract from the weapon's Concealability. Once installed, gas-vent systems cannot be removed. Two versions are available.
Gas-vent system with 2 points of recoil compensation, -1 Concealability: 450¥
Gas-vent system with 3 points of recoil compensation, -2 Concealability: 700¥
Grenade Launcher: Actually a weapon in its own right, though rarely used in modern forces except as an under-barrel addition to an assault rifle, the launcher fires a round from its integral magazine with either a thumb-press button or a separate trigger. These weapons fire only mini-grenades. Available only in under-barrel versions. Once installed, it cannot be removed. -3 Concealability. 1,700¥
Gyro Stabilization: These systems consist of a heavy upper-body harness system with an attached, articulated, gyro-stabilized arm that mounts a rifle or heavy weapon. The gyro-stabilization system neutralizes recoil and movement modifiers. Standard military systems also include smart goggles with a protected cable connection. Mounted smartguns may still be fed through standard palm induction links. While worn, the entire system provides an additional point of impact and ballistic armor, and is in no way concealable. It takes 5 minutes to get into a gyromount harness, 1 Complex Action to "quick-release" out of it. Attaching or removing a weapon from the mount requires 2 Complex Actions.
Standard Gyro-mount (Rating 5): 2,500¥
Deluxe Gyro-mount (Rating 6): 6,000¥
Imaging Scopes: A variety of imaging scopes are available, including low-light, infrared, and simple magnification. Imaging scopes can only be top-mounted. Scopes may not be used with smartlink systems. Scopes require 1 Complex Action to install/remove. Magnification systems have a -1 Concealability Rating, low-light and thermographic systems have a -2 Concealability.
500¥ for Rating 1 magnification
800¥ for Rating 2 magnification
1,200¥ for Rating 3 magnification
1,500¥ for low-light or thermographic capability
Laser Sights: This device projects a laser beam to produce a glowing red spot on the target point. The sight activates when the user touches the trigger. Such sights may not be used with any kind of smartlink system. Laser sights are available in under-barrel or top-mounting versions. Mounting a laser sight adds -1 to the Concealability Rating, and requires 1 Complex Action to install/remove. 500¥
Shock Pads: Shock-absorbing pads that can be mounted on the rigid shoulder stock (not folding stock) of a rifle, assault rifle, or shotgun, or on the hip brace of a heavy automatic weapon. The shock pad gives 1 point of recoil compensation. 200¥
Silencer: A silencer is a barrel-mounted accessory that reduces the sound and flash of a weapon's discharge. Silencers can only be used with single-shot or semi-automatic weapons. They cannot be used with revolvers. A silencer applies a +4 target modifier to any attempt to notice the weapon's use, or to locate the weapon's firer. Using a silencer modifies Concealability by -2, and requires 1 Complex Action to install/remove. 500¥
Smart Goggles: A pair of oversized goggles that connect by fiber-optic cable to a weapon rigged as a smartgun. The chips in the gun feed into the receptors in the goggles, producing red cross hairs in the user's field of vision, centered on where the gun is pointing. The gun's ammo status appears in the user's field of vision as well. This system may be built into a helmet or, for enough nuyen, rigged as mirrored sunglasses. In addition to simple targeting, smart goggles may be set up for low-light or infrared reception. 3,000¥ (+1,000¥ for low-light or infrared additions)
Smartgun Systems: Available in two forms, internal and external, the system provides a feedback circuit relating the gun's angle of fire to the shooter's line of sight. The internal smartgun system is built into the gun and doubles the weapon's cost if installed after manufacturing. The external system mounts on the weapon (top- or under-barrel positions) and can be transferred from weapon to weapon, with one hour of maintenance and alignment. These units cost 600¥. Without a receptor (smart goggles or smartlink), the hardware is simply dead weight.
Sound Suppressor: Similar to silencers, sound suppressors are used with burst-fire and full-auto-capable weapons. A sound suppressor adds a +2 target modifier to any attempt to notice the weapon's use or to locate the weapon's firer. Sound suppressors must be replaced every 300 rounds of burst or autofire. A sound suppressor modifies Concealability by -2, and requires two Complex Actions to install/remove. 750¥
Spare Clips: Extra ammunition clips cost 5¥ per clip, unloaded. They hold the maximum rounds available for the weapon, and are not interchangeable from weapon to weapon, even within the same class.
Tripod: A heavy, stable mounting for heavy weapons, tripods are not concealable, and provide 6 points of recoil compensation. 600¥
AMMUNITION
In Shadowrun, each kind of gun can trade ammo with another of its class. Thus, all light pistols share ammo. Use the categories shown on the Weapon Range Table, p. 88, to determine what gun types share ammo. Shotgun weapons, whether pistol or rifle, can share ammo. Standard ammo costs 20¥ for 10 rounds.
See Ammunition rules in the Combat Section, p. 93, for special game rules relating to the different kinds of ammunition.
Explosive Rounds: Very tiny versions of grenades, explosive rounds come with standard military weapons. Though unpopular with troops because of the disastrous results of a weapon malfunction or misfire, these rounds remain in wide use by both civilians and the military. Exposure to intense heat such as flames or fireballs can also cook the touchy things. 50¥ for 10 rounds.
Flechette Rounds: Tiny, tightly-packed slivers function as the business end of a flechette round. They are devastating against unprotected targets, and will cut through standard ballistic protection. Impact armor can easily stand up to this ammunition. 100¥ for 10 rounds.
Gel Rounds: Designed as a non-lethal round for riot control, these rounds use a hard jelly-like substance to achieve their effect. Impact armor is very effective against this ammunition, and ballistic armor is affected normally. 30¥ for 10 rounds.
Stun Rounds: Also designed for riot control, these rounds work only in large-bore weapons such as shotguns. Impact armor is effective against this ammunition, but ballistic armor is useless against the relatively high mass and low speed of these rounds. 100¥ per 10 rounds.
EXPLOSIVES
Hand Grenades: Grenades are small, self-contained packages of explosive, timer, and detonator. They may be set to explode on impact, or at any time from 2 seconds to 2 minutes. Non-aerodynamic models often offer a "booby-trap" setting that detonates by electric signal or pressure release. These models are shaped as spheres or cylinders. Aerodynamic models are rings or disks with superior range capabilities. Explosive grenades come in one of three types. Defensive grenades have the lowest radius of destruction, allowing the character to use the grenade as he presses forward. Offensive grenades have a higher fragmentation effect. Concussion grenades are intended to have little fragmentation effect at all, relying on the blast effect to stun or injure targets. 30¥ per grenade, regardless of type.
Mini-grenades: Mini-grenades are bullet-like projectiles designed for grenade launchers. They cannot be armed and thrown. Mini-grenades come in offensive, defensive, and concussion forms, delivering the same blast as their larger brothers. Mini-grenades cost 50¥ per grenade, regardless of type.
Plastic Explosives: Highly stable, moldable, and slightly sticky, these substances are ideal for certain jobs, such as blowing a hole in a wall. Compounds are usually color-tinted to indicate the level of current needed to detonate them, from the black of magnetic-field induction to the chalky white of 440-volt industrial explosive. Commercial (non-plastic) explosives cost 60¥ per kilogram. Compound IV plastic explosives cost 80¥ per kilo, and Compound 12 costs 200¥ per kilo. Timers (2 second to 2 hours) can be purchased for 100¥ each. Radio detonators (one-half kilometer range) cost 250¥. The Damage Code is (Rating)D per kilogram. Use the following formula for multiple kilograms: (Rating) x √kilograms D. The Power of the blast is reduced by the base Rating per meter. See Blast Effects, p. 97.
ARMOR
Technically, there are two types of armor: dermal armor (cybernetic or natural) and worn.
Dermal armor works against anything by increasing the character's Body Attribute. It does not aid in healing.
External armor works differently. It has two ratings: ballistic and impact. No matter how many pieces of armor are worn, only the highest rating counts for Damage Resistance Tests.
Ballistic armor protects against projectiles delivering large amounts of kinetic energy in short amounts of time, mostly bullets. Impact armor protects against projectiles with lesser kinetic transfer: projectile weapons, explosives, hand-held weapons, stun ammunition, and damaging manipulation spells.
Armor Clothing: The prime choice for an everyday stroll along the streets of 2053. Fashion designers worldwide offer a variety of styles in fabrics made of descendants of Kevlar™. 500¥
Armor Jacket: Available in a wide selection of tailoring, from chic street styling to the harsh ribbed and padded aesthetic of macho militarism, these jackets offer substantial protection. 900¥
Armor Vest: The vest provides slim-line protection under normal clothing. Additional rigid plates provide improved protection at the expense of subtlety. 200¥, or 600¥ with plates
Helmet: Most corporations provide distinctive headgear for their security personnel. An exception to the basic rule, a helmet does add its rating to other exterior armor. 200¥
Heavy Armor: These are obvious armors, often styled for intimidation as much as for protection and ease of movement. They already include helmets. Partial suits use rigid plates on the torso and head and occasionally elsewhere. These plates may be integral to an undersuit or attached separately. Full suits use heavier undersuits and more extensive plating. They often offer environmental sealing with minimal preparation. Heavy armor also affects the Combat Pool. See Combat Pool, p. 84. 20,000¥ for full suit, 10,000¥ for partial
Lined Coat: Available in a variety of styles, the lined coat is a popular form of armor. Its appearance is reminiscent of the long dusters worn in the days of the wild West. It uses rigid plates concealed between layers of ballistic cloth to cover vital organs. Lined coats add +2 to the Concealability of any weapon hidden under it. 700¥
SURVEILLANCE AND SECURITY
VISION ENHANCERS
Binoculars: These flat, compact digital imagers produce high resolution at up to 50x magnification. Optical glass variants are available for magicians. Enhanced models can operate in low-light or function on thermographic principles. 100¥ for magnification, 300¥ for low-light, 350¥ for thermographic
Goggles: Strap-on models or helmet visors allow low-light or thermographic vision. 1,500¥ for magnification, 2,000¥ for low-light, 2,200¥ for thermographic
COMMUNICATIONS
Kleen-tac™ backing makes these items attachable almost anywhere.
Micro-transceiver: This flat 2 cm disk transmits on a preselected radio frequency with a range of 5 kilometers. 2,500¥
Micro-recorder: This small (3 x 3 x 1.5 cm) case can record up to 6 hours. It may be set to voice-activation to increase effective recording time. 1,000¥
Micro-camcorder: The case (3 x 5 x 2 cm) comes with a three-hour vid cartridge. It may be set to activate with motion. The recording’s image carries time indicators from its internal clock. 2,500¥
SURVEILLANCE MEASURES
Surveillance measures and countermeasures oppose each other. See Using Equipment, p. 184 of Behind the Scenes.
Prices for surveillance measures and countermeasures are listed for the base system, Rating 1. For the final cost of available higher ratings, multiply the base cost by the rating. Generally, the maximum rating is 10. See Availability, p. 184, for additional information.
Data Codebreaker: This sophisticated device, the size of a briefcase, unscrambles the encryption on a data pulse. It can receive transmissions from dataline taps or accept standard recordings. Base 10,000¥
Dataline Tap: Spliced into a dataline, the tap will transmit a copy of any data to a distant receiver. To avoid detection, many devices are set to conduct burst-data transmissions at irregular intervals. Base 5,000¥
Laser Microphone: This device bounces a beam against a solid object, reading the vibrational variations of the surface and translating them into the sounds that are occurring on the other side of the surface. Base 1,500¥
Shotgun Microphone: This directional microphone (30 x 8 cm polyfoam-protected cone attached to a pistol grip) allows the user to listen in on distant conversations. Solid objects block reception, as do loud sounds outside of the line of eavesdropping. Base 1,000¥
Signal Locator: This comes in a hard plastic case with a map screen in its lid. Using a detachable sensor, it triangulates on a set tracking signal, displaying its location on the map. The device can also sweep transmission bands for other tracking signals. Base 1,000¥
Tracking Signal: This is a homing signal transmitter (4 cm-diameter disk) with Kleen-tac™ backing. The typical transmission range is 5 kilometers in cities. Smaller versions have correspondingly smaller ranges. The criminal justice system uses a special ankle band sealed on the leg of a criminal to broadcast his location at all times. 100¥, +8 point of Concealability
Voice Identifier: This system is designed to defeat voice-masking devices. It analyzes the masked voice, offering a variety of possible voices, one of which should be a recognizable version of the original voice. Base 2,000¥
SURVEILLANCE COUNTERMEASURES
Bug Scanner: This hand-held device scans for the micro-induction field created by micro-transceivers and other monitoring devices. The scanner will not detect bugs unless they are transmitting. The case’s holographic screen displays a directional arrow pointing to the bug. Base 500¥
Data Encryption System: Placed in-line with any fiber-optic transmission device, this system will encrypt the signal so that it can be unscrambled only by a receiver with the proper decode sequence. The keypad on this device allows selection of random or pre-arranged codings. Base 1,000¥
Dataline Scanner: When in-line with a system, this device emits a pulse, measures its return, and analyzes the echo to detect the presence of dataline taps, even those that are inactive. The scanner cannot determine the location of the tap. Base 100¥
Jammer: This transmitter overrides broadcast signals, scrambling them by filling the band with garbage. Base 1,000¥
Voice Mask: This small disk (3 cm-diameter), when worn or held near the throat, creates a resonating frequency to distort the timbre and pitch of the user’s voice. Base 3,000¥
White Noise Generator: This device creates a field of random noise, masking the sounds within its area. It is designed to defeat eavesdroppers and long-range microphones (shotgun or laser). Base 1,500¥
SECURITY DEVICES
Security device prices are listed for the base of Rating 1. Higher ratings are available; multiply the base cost by the rating to get the final cost. The usual maximum is Rating 10. See Availability, p. 184.
Identification Scanners: A variety of devices contain readers (pads for thumbprints and palmprints; eyecup pads for retinal scans) and library files of recording patterns. Most record the patterns of anyone who attempts to use the scanner. ID scanners are often incorporated into locks, which then open only to authorized patterns. Base 200¥ for thumbprint scanner, 300¥ for palmprint scanner, 1,000¥ for retinal scanner
Maglocks: Household and commercial security rely almost exclusively on maglocks, computer-controlled systems operable only with the proper passcode, keycard, or credstick. Usually, the only visible component of these locks is the slot or slot-keypad mount. In high-security areas, a thumbpad or retinal scanner may also be present. Maglocks may be linked to the PANICBUTTON™ system to signal an alarm if tampering with the lock occurs. Base 100¥
Maglock Passkeys: These sophisticated electronic devices fool a maglock into opening. Use of such systems often leaves the lock scrambled or sluggish in response, providing a warning that the lock has been violated. Base 10,000¥
Restraints: Besides the usual metal models, high-tech plastic strips may be heat-fused to a subject’s wrists or ankles, where they will remain in place until cut free. Such restraints can be painful if the wearer resists their constraints. 50¥ for metal (effective Barrier Rating 12), 20¥ for plastic (effective Barrier Rating 15)
Squealer: Formally known as a location forbidden, this small box is strapped to the wrist or ankle of corporate employees or visitors. When the wearer approaches within a specified distance of a restricted area, the box emits a polite warning. At a closer distance, the device transmits a call to security and activates a siren to alert guards in the area. (It has an effective Rating 5 for the purposes of avoiding jamming.) 100¥
SURVIVAL GEAR
Some pieces of survival gear have prices listed for the base system, Rating 1. Higher ratings are available; multiply the base cost by the rating to get the final cost. The usual maximum is Rating 10. See Availability, p. 184, for additional information.
Chemsuit: This slick, impermeable garment usually consists of booted coveralls, a hooded poncho, and mittens. The hood is often transparent, at least in the face area, and fitted with an air filter. Designer versions are popular in the UCAS and other industrialized areas for the miserable, “hard rain” days. Base 200¥
Respirator: This is a small oxygen cylinder (20 x 10 cm) connected by a plastic hose to a full or partial face mask. It provides enough air for several hours of moderate exertion. A pressure regulator allows the wearer to use the respirator underwater. 500¥ for respirator, 250¥ additional for pressure regulator
Survival Kit: This rugged bag contains a useful assortment of stuff: flares, small utility knife, lighter, matches, compass, lightweight thermal blanket, several days’ worth of ration bars, a water-purification unit, a filter mask, and other items. 100¥
WORKING GEAR
To use Build/Repair Skills requires tools to do the job. Tools in Shadowrun come in kits, shops, and facilities.
A kit is portable and contains the basic gear to make repairs. A shop is transportable with a large van or small truck.
A facility is immobile because of the bulky, heavy machines involved.
The prices are variable, depending on the type of tools. The base cost is 500¥ for a kit, 5,000¥ for a shop, and 100,000¥ for a facility.
General construction uses basic tools, which have the base cost. Electronic, computer, and cyberware repairs require microtronics tools, which cost triple the base figures.
Vehicle tools cost double the base figures.
LIFESTYLE
ENTERTAINMENT
Music: Recorded music comes in two basic forms, laser-read compact disks (CD) and optical chips (OC). Both formats record to a fidelity far beyond the average person’s discrimination. Playback units are slightly larger than the storage disk, fitting comfortably in the hand or clipping to a belt. Extra speakers can achieve a “total dimension of sound.” Headsets or mastoid-implant speakers are available for private listening. Units with flat roll-out screens are available for disks with video tracks.
Video: Video recording systems long ago switched to digital information-storage and liquid-crystal screens. Most recorders function in the pseudo-holographic format popularly known as trideo, or trid. Despite technical advances, the production of high-quality holograms in open air still eludes technicians. Even those produced under controlled conditions lack proper texture and animation. Trid screens range from tiny, 30 mm diagonal wristphone displays to wall-sized arrays. Screens capable of displaying recorded imagery have the usual image-speed and quality controls, as well as simple special-effects distortion and color-alteration capability.
Simsense: Simulated sensory impressions are the latest fashion in entertainment. Developed from the early ASIST (Artificial Sensory Induction Systems) technology, the system consists of a lightweight headset that deceives the user by inducing false sensory signals in the brain. The user, despite the imperfect simulation and the undercurrent of sensory impressions from the real world around him, experiences a programmed set of stimuli while neural overrides prevent him from injuring himself or others during playback. Most users prefer programs that are “hosted” by a specific simstar whose actual sensations are the ones that have been recorded, allowing the user a true vicarious experience. Many simstars have cults of fans devoted to them and emulating their every move. The simsense headset is connected by fiber optics to a player unit. A unit may be set up for direct feed into a datajack. Portable simsense recorders are available to the public, but they lack the clarity and editing capability of professional equipment.
Live Performance: Live performances continue to be popular in the 2050s. Performers, both actors and singers, often have implanted voice amplifiers, either simple volume enhancers or sophisticated transmitting microphones that broadcast to speakers placed around the hall. Such equipment often features voice modifiers and sound-effects generators. The basic shape and style of musical instruments have changed little, but there has been a proliferation of the electronic versions. Few, if any, pop performers use anything other than synthesized sound. Highly technical musicians work with a synthlink, a special system that operates through a datajack to allow the user to cybernetically control his instrument for greater complexity and subtlety of sound than is otherwise possible.
Networks: Corporate-owned and viewer-supported networks still make up the bulk of transmitted trideo in 2053. Although the term “broadcasting” remains in use, all transmissions are digitized and travel over fiber-optic cables to individual subscribers.
ELECTRONICS
The personal electronics industry, apart from the enormous computer and cyber subsectors, is one of the major growth sectors of the world economy in 2053. Samples are ubiquitous, and advertising invasive. Everywhere the citizen is bombarded with catch phrases and taglines - compact, flexible, advanced, stylish, tailored. All are buzzwords used to describe the wonders of 21st-century technology.
Credstick: A credstick is a combination passport, keyring, credit card, checkbook, and business card. It is a small plastic cylinder tapering to a point. The blunt end houses a computer. The chip in the credstick contains the owner’s System Identification Number (SIN), credit balance, financial records, and resume, as well as passcodes for the owner’s locks. When used to conduct transactions or access the owner’s records or property, the credstick transmits identification data from a simple ID number (standard) or a thumbprint (silver stick) or a retinal pattern (platinum sticks) to the bank or lock. The transmission must match the data on file, and the user must confirm by typing the ID number, thumbing a pad, or submitting to a retinal scan, as appropriate. Once the user is confirmed as the owner of the credstick, the transaction is approved or the lock opened. Credsticks record transactions not already in the financial computer network, but they must be periodically connected to the network to validate such transactions. Failure to do so results in invalidation of all non-network transactions and cancellation of the credstick’s financial function. Limited-use credsticks carry a specified credit limit, much like a certified check. Ownership of a certified credstick is by the bearer.
Telecom: The telecom is the entertainment and communication center of the modern home. It also provides a work station for a home office or the telecommuting corporate worker. The typical telecom functions as a telephone with audio-video reception and transmission (speaker phone is the normal mode, but handsets and headsets, with or without connecting fibers, are available), a computer with display screen, and keyboard (advanced models have datajacks and interface hardware), and a television (the most advanced models feature simsense ports). The exact services accessible through the telecom depends on the owner’s subscriptions. Subscription services include the usual entertainment, sales, news, dating, sports, and literary channels; magazine and news services, with printouts available through the computer printer; public data access; phone services on local or long-distance nets; and secretarial services.
Portable Phones: Portable phones range from the common wrist models, with or without flip-up view screen, to “walkie-talkie” handset units, to audio-only earplug models with lightweight boom microphones. Range is limited, but the user may wear a booster pack on his belt or on any other convenient surface or part of his clothes. Portable phones without a fiber link-up are subject to electromagnetic distortions and jamming.
Pocket Secretary: The pocket secretary is an office for the businessman on the go. The compact unit functions as a portable phone, a computer (100 Mp), and filing system. Standard software performs call screening, answering-machine functions, automatic teleconfirmation of credit transactions, word processing with standard letters on file and stenographer functions. Pocket secretaries are never equipped for jacking into the Matrix. Cases are shock- and water-resistant for durability and long service.
Personal Computers: The standard personal computer of 2053 is the size of a keyboard. It has a roll-out flat-screen monitor. A digital radio signal transmits input and output to peripherals. Program and data cartridges are the size of a standard credstick and slot into the ends of the keyboard. Internal program storage is more than sufficient for common programs such as word and data processors, communications software, and games, and the storage is non-volatile (stored indefinitely). Disposable printers for one-color printing come attached to containers of paper, barely increasing the size. Full-color printers add two centimeters to the height of the paper box. Smaller computers exist, usually designed for a particular function. These accept a limited range of spoken commands, and they output data in a synthesized voice. They may be fiber-linked to a monitor. Internal storage capacity is limited, and they do not accept standard program or data cartridges. Some models have miniature keyboards, usable with a stylus, accept links to standard keyboards, or recognize handwriting.
Data Display Systems: Typical data units have fold-up monitors and will accept on-line input or standard chip cartridges, allowing them to function as a computer’s display screen, a television, a video player, or a simple data reader. For people who work with their hands, there are headset units that project data in “heads-up” display on a surface such as a transparent face shield, the lens of a pair of glasses, or a monocle. A headset unit usually has only one slot to accept standard data cartridges (1,000 Mp). Helmets of government and corporate military forces often have headset display units, allowing soldiers to access maps and other important tactical data without disrupting their regular functions.
CYBERWARE
Each item of cyberware has an Essence Cost. This is the reduction of the character’s Essence Rating that occurs when the cyberware is implanted. If a character’s Essence ever falls below 0, his life force ebbs and he will die in short order. Even 0 Essence is tough to handle, promoting despair and melancholy. Folks of such low Essence walk the thin edge of sanity.
HEADWARE
This hardware, small and complex, requires the replacement of sections of the cranium with plastic plates of artificial bone. There is no loss of skull strength.
Communications
Chipjack: A specialized form of datajack that allows access to a skillsoft or datasoft. 1,000¥
Datajack: The almost universal mark of the cyber-conscious user. Standard datajacks allow both input and output to certain headware and bodyware items. 1,000¥
Radio: This headware allows full-band, limited-range communications. The signal quality is rarely as good as a telephone, but the ability to switch bands makes the system more popular with the military or any user expecting active jamming. When transmitting, the user must speak, though it may be in tones inaudible to those nearby. For the cost- or health-conscious, receiver-only models are available. 4,000¥ for two-way radio, 2,000¥ for receiver. Multiply the cost by the rating of any levels of ECM/ECCM installed. See Using Equipment, p. 184.
Synthlink: This specialized datajack linked to control systems is a musician’s tool, allowing cybernetic use of music synthesizers. 1,000¥
Telephone: A real headphone allows the user to access the telenet from his head. Like all mobile phones, the quality of the link is unsuitable for a decking connection. The user may speak normally or, with the pressure on a sub-dermal switch, speak sub-vocally. 3,700¥
Ears
Cyber replacement of the ears typically features an obvious prosthesis that provides perfect hearing within normal ranges. The cyberear will also accept a minor additional adjustment (one feature of .2 Essence Cost or less) without additional impact on the user’s system. 4,000¥ for replacement, 2,000¥ for modification
Cosmetic Modification: There is an endless variety of shapes and sizes. By far the most popular is the pointing and/or extension for metahuman wannabees. 1,000¥
Damper: This modification protects the user from sudden increases in sound level as well as providing partial protection from damaging frequencies. 3,500¥
High Frequency: The user can hear sounds of pitch higher than the normal human hearing range. 3,000¥
Low Frequency: The user can hear sounds of pitch lower than the normal human hearing range. 3,000¥
Recorder: The user can record anything he can hear. The recorder can play back recordings inside the head (with a cyberear or modification). If linked to a standard datajack, it can play them back through a speaker. 7,000¥
Eyes
Cyber replacement of normal eyes offers 20/20 vision as standard. It almost always involves both eyes, because mismatched pairs will send imbalanced signals to the brain. In outward appearance the implants may be indistinguishable from biological eyes (at least without an eye exam) or they may be outlandish, ranging from gold or neon irised effects (complete with gold-lettered manufacturer’s logo) to the high-chrome, featureless effect. Cybereyes will accept additional vision enhancements up to .5 Essence Cost without further Essence loss. 5,000¥
Retinal modification, rather than eye replacement, is also an option for the appearance-conscious, but each feature impacts independently on the user’s system. Duplication of another person’s retinal pattern, either permanently in a retinal modification or as a stored pattern in a cybereye, is a capital crime. It is also of dubious use, because the duplicate rarely is of high enough fidelity to consistently fool retinal scanners. Continual changes also are a health hazard. 50,000¥ times the rating (for use against retinal scanners).
Camera: The brain can store a digital copy of any image viewed through the eye. If the eyes are linked to a standard datajack, images may be downloaded to any data system. Recording 1 second of video requires 1 Mp of storage. Otherwise, the image-storage chip must be removed through a port in the eye. 5,000¥
Cosmetic Modification: Alteration of iris color is the most popular type, but pupil-shape alteration and cornea pigmentation are also common. 1,000¥
Flare Compensation: This protects the user from blinding flashes of light, as well as simple glare. Eliminates glare vision modifiers. 2,000¥
Low-Light: The user can see normally in light levels as low as starlight. Total darkness, rare in the cities of the 2050 era, still renders the user as blind as an unmodified person. 3,000¥
Thermographic: This cyberware operates in the infrared portion of the spectrum, allowing the user to see heat patterns. Light level has no effect, but strong sources of heat act much like a bright glare does to normal vision, often blinding the user. 3,000¥
Internal Headware
Cortex Bombs: These are an illegal method of coercion offering the ultimate headache. A small amount of fuergel or some similar explosive is implanted at the brain stem. The triggering circumstance is determined at the time of implant, either set as a timer or prepared for the receipt of an electromagnetic signal. Most cortex bombs are booby-trapped, rigged to explode if the wearer’s nervous system is tampered with in any way. The explosion of a cortex bomb kills the wearer and endangers those around him (1-meter radius, 8D explosion). 500,000¥
Memory: This is the definition of the computing power of a character’s headware systems. It covers the storage space as well. Unless the character wants to change data surgically, he needs a datajack. Memory is the amount of space available in megapulses (Mp). Raw data, skill software, and certain programs can be stored, but other equipment gives the user access to them. 100¥ times the number of Mp
Datasoft Link: This gives the user mental access to his KnowSofts, either in a chipjack or downloaded into headware memory. 1,000¥
Display Link: This allows a user to display data on the retina or cybereye, letting him read what is displayed in his head. 1,000¥
Data Lock: This denies wearers access to their own cyber memory space. Input or output through a datajack requires a special code. This option is very popular for couriers. 1,000¥
Data Filter: This is a special sensory block that prohibits wearers from absorbing sensory data into their own memory while retaining the data in their cybernetic memory. A data filter turns a character into an organic audio-visual recorder, unaware of what he has heard and witnessed while the recording feature is active. This is very popular for confidential couriers and secretaries. 5,000¥
Skillsofts: Memory on a chip. When utilized in conjunction with the proper headware and bodyware, skillsofts allow users to know and do things they actually never learned in the normal fashion. Because a skillsoft’s “memory imaging” encoding differs radically from any actual memories or learned experiences the user may already have, the skillwire system must override the user’s own reflexes, abilities, and memories, forcing a reliance on the encoded capabilities. When a skillsoft is accessed that duplicates a skill the character already possesses naturally, he uses only the skillsoft’s rating. The character’s natural ability is lost for the duration of the skillsoft access. Skillsofts come in three types. KnowSofts replicate Knowledge Skills like Science or Mental Skills. A sub-classification of KnowSoft is the LinguaSoft which allows language use and replicates Language Skills. DataSofts are raw data, pure information, like that found in a textbook. No application or comprehension ability comes with the DataSoft. Just the data. ActiveSofts replicate Active Skills like Combat, Physical, Technical, or Vehicle Skills. KnowSofts can be accessed through a chipjack, or uploaded into headware memory and accessed with a datasoft link. DataSofts can be accessed through a datajack or chipjack, sent to a display or datasoft link, or put into headware memory and downloaded to a display link or datasoft link. Full skillwire systems are required for the use of ActiveSofts. Additional chipjacks can accommodate additional skillsofts. Skillsofts are usually sold installed in 5-centimeter-long cylinders to protect the chip until it is inserted into a jack. Once the chip is in, and the data transferred, the user can remove the chip. Skillsofts can be accessed just the same whether via a datajack or downloaded into headware memory. If downloaded, the resulting program takes up the amount of space shown on the Skill Memory Table. ActiveSofts do not provide associated Dice Pools. For example, the user of a Computer ActiveSoft does not receive a Hacking Pool. Additionally, Magic Skills like Sorcery and Conjuring cannot be made into ActiveSofts.
SKILLSOFT COSTS
Type
Cost
KnowSoft
Mp x 150¥
LinguaSoft
Mp x 50¥
DataSoft
Varies with value of data
ActiveSoft
Mp x 100¥

SKILL MEMORY TABLE
Skill Type
Rating (In Mp)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
General


10
20
30
200
250
300
700
800
900
2,000
Concentration


6
12
18
120
150
180
420
480
540
1,200
Specialization


4
8
12
80
100
120
280
320
360
800
Language


3
6
9
24
30
36
70
80
90
300

BODYWARE
Bodyware is cyberware implanted in locations other than the user’s head. Some types, such as dermal plating, also involve additions to the skull.
Dermal Plating: This is an invasive protection system that uses hard plastic and metal fiber plates bonded to the user’s skin to produce dermal armor. Dermal plating does limit skin flexibility and is obvious. The armor plates may be tailored to any surface texture or color. It comes in three strengths, which affect the level of invasion. The character’s Body is increased by the rating. 6,000¥ for Rating 1; 15,000¥ for Rating 2; 45,000¥ for Rating 3. Does not assist in healing.
Filtration Systems: These systems operate to protect the user from specified substances. Toxins and rated gases oppose the system’s rating. If the system fails, the toxin takes effect at full value. A replacement trachea fitted with filters protects the user from smoke and most gases. A specialized form, the artificial gill, allows the user to filter oxygen from water. A kidney replacement includes toxin filters to remove foreign agents from the bloodstream. It is effective against most injected drugs and many diseases. There is also a system of implanted filters designed to detoxify a wide range of poisons, including alcohol, taken orally. Ratings to a maximum of 10 are available. 15,000¥ times the rating for an air filter, 10,000¥ times the rating for a blood or toxin filter
Fingertip Compartment: This is a small storage space replacing the last joint of a finger. It is ideal for concealing data chips. It is also commonly used for the concealment of a monofilament whip, because the replacement joint can serve as the control weight. 3,000¥
Hand Razors: These are 2.5-centimeter chromed steel or carbon fiber blades that replace the user’s fingernails. The razors anchor to the user’s bones. Retractable versions slide out of sight under synthetic nail replacements. 4,500¥, 9,000¥ for retractable version
Limbs: Substitute limbs come in two basic models, obvious cyberlimbs and fully functional, natural-looking replacements. Replacements offer no special abilities. Other cyberlimbs can offer enhanced strength, but the typical user can rarely apply the limb’s full strength. Trying to lift a car single-handedly will only bring a character grief and pain as the limb rips free from its flesh-and-blood moorings. Cyberlimbs may have spurs and hand razors at no additional loss to the user’s system. Multiple replacements make the user less vulnerable to additional damage. Each pair of limbs replaced counts as one level of dermal armor. 50,000¥ for replacement, 100,000¥ for cyberlimb, plus 150,000¥ for each level of increased strength
Muscle Replacement: Implanted, vat-grown synthetic muscles replace the user’s own. Calcium treatments and skeletal reinforcement allow an overall increase in the user’s strength. Rating increases apply to Strength and Quickness, but this change does not affect Reaction. The maximum increase is 4. 20,000¥ times the rating
Skillwires: These are an invasive system of neuro-muscular controllers necessary for a user to take advantage of ActiveSofts. The Skillwire Rating limits the total rating of all the ActiveSofts in use at any one time. The system includes a chipjack for the insertion of a skillsoft. 10,000¥ times the Rating if 1-3, 100,000¥ times the Rating if 4-6, 1,000,000¥ times the Rating if 7-9
Smartlink: This is the feedback loop circuitry necessary to take full advantage of a smartgun. Targeting information appears on the user’s retina or cybereye as a small dot or cross hairs that corresponds to the smartweapon’s current line of fire. Typical systems use a subdermal induction pad in the user’s palm to link with the smartgun. 2,500¥
Spur: A narrow blade attached to the user’s bone, similar to a razor. Retractable versions must be placed where they can be withdrawn along a long bone. Alternatively, a set of three smaller blades may be anchored to the back of the hand. 7,000¥; 11,500¥ for retractable
Vehicle Control Rig: These are neuro-enhancers and muscular signal transference (MST) interfaces. Each level adds +2 to the user’s Reaction while rigging. Each level also allows an additional +1D6 Initiative die when the user is controlling a vehicle through a datajack that is equipped with vehicle control gear. 12,000¥ for Level 1, 60,000¥ for Level 2, 300,000¥ for Level 3
Voice Modulator: Voice modulators are popular with entertainers. Stage performers commonly make use of the volume feature, and singers use the tonal shift. 45,000¥ plus the cost of features. Increased volume makes the user into a loudspeaker (10,000¥). Tonal shift alters tones for perfect bird calls, mellifluous singing, and uncanny vocal impressions. Modulations and secondary quavers make detection simple for a vocal-pattern recognizer (25,000¥). Secondary pattern, an illegal modification, allows the user to install a second vocal pattern and reproduce it in a form that is almost indistinguishable from an unmodified pattern (50,000¥). Playback allows the user to access an audio record, in data storage or fed in through a datajack, and reproduce it almost perfectly (40,000¥).
Wired Reflexes: These are implanted neural boosters and adrenaline stimulators. Each level adds +2 to the user’s Reaction and gives +1D6 Initiative die. 55,000¥ for Level 1, 165,000¥ for Level 2, 500,000¥ for Level 3
CYBERDECKS AND PROGRAMS
This gear is described in the Matrix chapter, p. 160.
BIOTECH
DocWagon™ Contract: Don’t leave home without it! DocWagon™ offers first-class medical care on a 24-hour, house (or street) call basis. Once a call from a platinum card-holder is confirmed, most DocWagon™ franchises guarantee arrival of a trauma team in less than ten minutes, or else the immediate medical care is free. Resuscitation service carries a high premium, as does High Threat Response (HTR) service. In the latter case, the client (or his heir) is expected to pay medical bills up to and including death compensation for DocWagon™ employees. A DocWagon™ contract requires a filing of tissue samples (held in a secure vault staffed by bonded guards) and comes with a sealed-band, direct-dial wrist phone, which also serves as a homing beacon for the roving DocWagon™ ambulances and choppers. Rupture of the band will, of course, alert the DocWagon™ representative. Gold service includes one free resuscitation per year, 50 percent reduction on HTR service charges, and a 10 percent discount on extended care. Platinum service includes four free resuscitations per year. There is no charge for HTR services, but employee death compensation still applies. It carries a 50 percent discount on extended care. 5,000¥ per year for basic service, 25,000¥ for gold service, 50,000¥ for platinum service
Medkit: The 2053 medkit is well-equipped to handle most typical medical emergencies. It includes drug supplies, bandages, tools, and even a doctor. Actually, it is an expert system (Biotech 3) designed to diagnose problems from information given by the user. The system will request more information if the diagnosis is unclear. Having determined a course of action, the kit will advise the user on techniques. The kit may be able to concoct a specific antidote to a toxin (Biotech Skill Test against the toxin’s Virulence Level), thereby canceling the toxin’s effects. Medkits are, of course, not infallible and a standard waiver of liability must be filed with the manufacturer on purchase of the item. Most models will advise of their inability to supply proper treatment as well as issuing reminders when their stocks of expendable materials are low. Supplies run out on a result of 1 on a 1D6 rolled following a treatment. 200¥. 50¥ for new drugs
Organic Replacements: Vat-grown replacement tissues and organs are readily available. Most common are “Type O” products tailored for minimal rejection-reaction, although they require a program of tailored immuno-suppressant treatment to prevent a body’s rejection of the transplant. The safest transplant material is grown from samples of the patient’s own body. Regrettably, no replacements for brain or nervous tissue are yet available, and fully viable clones of a person exist only in the realm of fiction. See Healing, p. 112, for details.
SLAP PATCHES
Slap patches are adhesive drug-dispensers that release measured doses to allow continual, safe administration of necessary chemicals. Patches must be applied directly against the patient’s skin. Dermal armor hinders their effects (reduce the Patch Rating by the Armor Rating), and blood filtration implants make all but the trauma patch ineffective.
Antidote Patch: This releases a broad-spectrum toxin antidote to aid the patient in resisting the effects of a toxin. The Patch Rating adds to the subject’s Body Attribute for Resistance Tests. Multiple patches give no additional effect. 50¥ times its rating
Stimulant Patch: This releases a non-addictive stimulant to keep a character awake at those times when awareness is vital. When used, reduce the Stun Damage on the Condition Monitor by a number of blocks equal to the patch’s rating. Magicians should be wary of side-effects that may damage their ability to use magic. The magician makes a Magic Test against a target number equal to the patch’s rating. If the test fails, the magician must follow the procedure for possible Essence loss as if he had taken a Deadly wound. (See Healing, p. 112, for details.) The effects of the patch wear off in 2D6 minutes and the removed damage is restored, plus one box of damage. 25¥ times its rating
Tranq Patch: This is designed to anesthetize patients in preparation for medical attention. Tranq patches are also used in some circles to sedate unruly prisoners. Both the patch and the patient must make a test. Each one uses its own Rating (Body Rating for the patient) as the number of dice to roll and the other’s rating as the target number. If the patch generates more successes than the character, each net success fills in a block on the Stun damage track of the subject’s Condition Monitor. 20¥ times its rating
Trauma Patch: This is the last-ditch hope of a victim unable to receive medical care. The trauma patch must be placed over the victim’s heart. It allows the character a second chance against death. See Healing, p. 112. 500¥
Stabilization Unit: An enclosed capsule with carrying handles, this unit is designed to stabilize a critically wounded person until proper medical care can be applied. It is standard equipment on DocWagon™ vehicles and in use with all the better ambulance services. The unit extends the amount of time a character has to escape death. Each minute of time in the stabilization unit becomes a number of hours equal to the rating. 10,000¥ for the standard model, (Rating 2), 20,000¥ for the deluxe (Rating 6)
MAGICAL EQUIPMENT
See the Magic chapter, p. 116, for item descriptions.
VEHICLES
GROUND
Vehicles operate on varied forms of power. Economy models and those intended for use with a power grid usually use high-capacity storage batteries that can be recharged at stations, parking garages, or on a grid track. Some have solar cell auxiliaries, but these provide only limited power. Vehicles in use with the Native American tribes or in outlying areas sometimes rely on alcohol fuels easily derived from organic materials. Long-distance vehicles still use some petroleum-derivative fuels. Luxury vehicles usually use petrochem. Whatever the form of fuel, the vehicles still handle with similar efficiency, the main differences arising in the cost and availability of the fuel and in the capacity of the vehicle for sustained travel.
Some ground vehicles have limited self-guidance capability. They can follow a programmed map and still react to conditions around them. The autopilot is very cautious, often stopping for no reason apparent to the passenger. Unexpected roadblocks confuse the system, prompting it to ask for instructions. The Autopilot Rating acts as the equivalent of the appropriate driving skill for the vehicle.
Combat vehicles have hardpoints and firmpoints to contain weapon systems. Some also have weapons incorporated into their structure. Such weapons may not be changed to suit a mission, as can those on a hardpoint. Hardpoints accept any heavy weapon or special weapons designed for vehicles. They halve the recoil modifier for the weapon. Firmpoints accept any firearm smaller than a heavy weapon. They also provide 1 point of recoil compensation. Weapons must be purchased separately. Adaptation of a weapon for a vehicle mount doubles its cost.
Cars
Mitsubishi Runabout: A one-person, three-wheeler that runs on electric power, the Runabout is designed for commuters and short-distance errands. It is affectionately referred to as “the box,” due to its blocky shape. 10,000¥
Chrysler-Nissan Jackrabbit: This electric two-seater’s low price and heavy advertising campaign have made it the most common car on North American highways. The back section may be used as a trunk or space to squeeze in another two passengers. 15,000¥
Ford Americar: A mid-size sedan. 20,000¥
Eurocar Westwind 2000: A sleek, low-slung speed machine. Side wheel-panel covers slide down in parking mode to lock and protect the tires. 100,000¥
Toyota Elite: A full-size luxury car whose interior appointments beggar some penthouse apartments. It has a superior autopilot. 125,000¥
Mitsubishi Nightsky: The limousine of the well-to-do, the Nightsky’s interior style and features make the Elite look like a cheap Sri Lankan import. A full suite of anti-theft systems, armor, medkit, rigger controls, telecom with direct satellite link-up, and wet bar are standard features. The autopilot is superior. Concealed defensive weaponry is often retrofitted. 250,000¥
Bikes
Dodge Scoot: An electric intra-city scooter. 2,000¥
Yamaha Rapier: A fast street machine whose slick styling makes it a favorite with go-gangs. 10,000¥
Harley Scorpion: A classic, heavy-bodied road hog. The Scorpion features folding aerodynamic panels that double as armor. Many consider it a combat bike. It can carry up to three firmpoints. 15,000¥ plus 1,000¥ per firmpoint
HOVERCRAFT
Chrysler-Nissan G12a: This is a general-purpose hovercraft that sees duty in passenger and freight versions. The separate driver’s compartment seats two, and the six-ton cargo flat may be fitted with a 30-passenger cabin. 50,000¥
BOATS
Watercraft feature the same power sources as ground vehicles, with a higher proportion using petrochem fuels. Large freighters are almost completely robot-controlled. The largest super-freighters and tankers have fusion plants.
Motorboats
Samuvani-CrisCraft Otter: A popular mid-size craft fine for pleasure boating, the Otter also does light hauling and utility work. 20,000¥
Aztech Nightrunner: This small, two-seat craft is equipped with auxiliary electric engines for silent running. Its composite hull and non-reflective paint, which reduce its heat signature, make it hard to detect. It can mount two firmpoints. 30,000¥
Sailboats
Sendanko Marlin: Designed as a pleasure boat, this 15-foot craft has gained notoriety as the favored boat of the infamous smuggler Janos Smoot ever since the Channel 32 docudrama of the irascible criminal’s life. 15,000¥
AIRCRAFT
Save for a few solar-powered pleasure and reconnaissance vehicles, aircraft are petrochem guzzlers. Designs are sophisticated, usually featuring fly-by-wire controls and adjustable airframes. Added to the availability of new composite materials, this has allowed the dreams of visionary designers of the 20th century to become everyday reality.
Autopilot systems work in a similar fashion to those on ground vehicles, but they are almost always tied into the Navstar position-location system. Aircraft categories are based on the system that provides the major portion of their lift.
Winged Planes
The minimum air speed of these craft is 50 meters per Combat Turn.
Cessna C750: A dual-prop craft serving as transport, the Cessna C750 can be configured to carry six passengers. The plane also sees service with border patrols and surveillance corporations. 200,000¥
Lear Platinum I: This sleek flying limousine carries advanced materials and features. It is the airborne equivalent of the Mitsubishi Nightsky. 500,000¥
Rotorcraft
Federated Boeing Commuter: A tilt-wing craft, the Commuter is designed for rapid transport to and from sites with limited landing area. It is primarily a passenger carrier. 625,000¥
Hughes WK-2 Stallion: The workhorse helicopter of the mid-21st century, this venerable design has seen a number of modifications. It features a two-seat tandem cockpit and a cabin that seats ten people. Armed (two hardpoints, two firmpoints) military variants are common in much of the world. 300,000¥
Ares Dragon: This large, double-rotor helicopter has a variety of military and civilian applications, from passenger transport (it can carry 24 battle-armed troops) through cargo and heavy-lifting duty to serving as a command post. It can mount two hardpoints. 600,000¥
Hughes Airstar: This luxury helicopter was designed for speed and agility. The standard corporate model carries armor and luxurious appointments. There are many reports of variants with concealed weapons. 900,000¥
MILITARY AND RESTRICTED-ISSUE VEHICLES
EFA Variants: Designed as the European Economic Community’s general fighter, this craft has been pirated worldwide, proving to be an extremely durable design primarily because of its ease of maintenance and adaptability to improved electronics and weapon systems. Many corporations maintain a squadron for escorting VIP jets. It carries an assault cannon in its nose and four hardpoints. 5,000,000¥
Thunderbirds: This is slang for a category of low-altitude vehicles (LAV) in service with militaries and corporations worldwide. These vehicles are heavily armed and armored and capable of extended operations in hostile environments.
GMC Banshee: This light t-bird is designed for reconnaissance and courier duty. It carries two assault cannons, two heavy machine guns, an autocannon in its turret, four hardpoints, and two surveillance/decoy drones.
SECURITY VEHICLES
This classification includes a variety of urban combat vehicles ranging from police squad cars to anti-terrorist assault vehicles. All are well-armored and capable of traversing typical city rubble.
Ares Citymaster: An urban riot-control vehicle, the Citymaster carries and serves as a command post for ten riot cops. A roof turret mounts a water cannon and a coaxial light machine gun. The machine gun usually uses gel rounds. 500,000¥
Chrysler-Nissan Patrol-1: A ubiquitous urban patrol car, the Chrysler-Nissan’s armored body features lock-down wheel protection and slide-up window armor with firing ports. In tight situations, the crew may release nausea gas from ports located around the exterior. 100,000¥
GMC Beachcraft Patroller: A swift, lightly armed patrol craft, the Patroller sees service with coast guards and security corps worldwide. It has two hardpoints. 750,000¥
GMC Riverine: A popular commercial patrol boat, the Riverine relies on water jets rather than propellers, making it an excellent shallow-water craft with superb maneuverability. It has four hardpoints. 75,000¥
Northrup PRC-42 Wasp: This single-man rotorcraft was designed for police and military service. The craft is very stealthy in that the pilot can cut power to the rotors some distance away and descend safely on autorotation effect alone. Combat support variants are beginning to appear. Nicknamed Yellowjackets, they carry one or two hardpoints. 220,000¥ for standard model, 280,000¥ for Yellowjacket
VECTORED THRUST
These craft are too fuel-inefficient to be practical for any user but the military and high-threat corporate operations.
Federated Boeing Eagle: A vectored-thrust aircraft designed for air superiority, it has entered limited commercial service. It has two assault cannon in its nose and six hardpoints. Restricted
DRONES
Survey of
VEHICLE WEAPONS
Autocannon: This is a light cannon with autoloader. Single-shot firing only. 12,000¥
Launcher: This small launcher uses the same missiles as a shoulder-fired launcher. 15,000¥
Water Cannon: A high-pressure projector, it always fires on “autofire” (10 shots an action) and suffers no recoil penalty. The Damage Code is on human scale, but any hit requires the target to make a Strength Test (Target Number 5) or be knocked over. If the weapon’s pump is connected to a water source, it does not need to “reload.” 20,000¥
RIGGER GEAR
Remote Adaptation: Any vehicle can be adapted for remote control. The cost for this is equal to 2,500¥ times the Body of the vehicle.
Vehicle Adaptation: Any vehicle can be adapted for rigger control. The cost is 2,800¥, plus rigging the vehicle for remote control.
Remote Control Deck: This portable control deck allows the remote control of a vehicle through a radio link. This control link is subject to disruption by jammers and atmospheric conditions. The deck has a video screen to display the output from a vehicle-mounted camera. It also has a keyboard and a set of switches, dials, and joysticks to manipulate the vehicle’s function. Each slave port allows the control of one

